303
Alabama
Alabama  is a state located in the southeastern region of the States. It is bordered by Tennessee to the north, Georgia to the east, Florida and the of Mexico to the south, and Mississippi to the west. Alabama ranks 30th in total land area and ranks second in the size of its inland waterways. The state ranks 23rd in population with 4.7 million residents in 2009.()From the Civil War until War II, Alabama, like many Southern states, suffered economic hardship, in part because of continued dependence on agriculture. Despite the growth of major industries and urban centers, white rural interests dominated the state legislature until the 1960s, while urban interests and Americans were under-represented.() Following World War II, Alabama experienced growth as the economy of the state transitioned from agriculture to diversified interests in heavy manufacturing, mineral extraction, education, and technology.  In addition, the establishment or expansion of multiple military installations, primarily those of the Army and Air Force, added to state jobs.Alabama is unofficially nicknamed the Yellowhammer State, after the state bird. Alabama is also known as the Heart of Dixie. The state tree is the Pine, the state flower is the Camellia. The capital of Alabama is Montgomery.  The largest city by population is Birmingham. The largest city by total land area is Huntsville. The oldest city is Mobile, founded by French colonists.HistoryEtymologyThe (people), a Muskogean-speaking tribe whose members lived just below the confluence of the Coosa and Rivers on the upper reaches of the River,() served as the etymological source of the names of the river and state. In the language, the word for an Alabama person is Albaamo (or variously Albaama or Albamo in different dialects; the plural form Alabama persons is Albaamaha).() The word Alabama is believed to have originated from the language() and was later adopted by the Alabama tribe as their name.()  The spelling of the word varies significantly between sources.(  The first usage appears in three accounts of the de Soto expedition of 1540 with Garcilasso de la Vega using Alibamo, while the Knight of Elvas and Rodrigo Ranjel wrote Alibamu and Limamu, respectively.(  As early as 1702, the tribe was known to the French as Alibamon with French maps identifying the river as Rivire des Alibamons.(  Other spellings of the appellation have included Alibamu, Alabamo, Albama, Alebamon, Alibama, Alibamou, Alabamu, and Allibamou.(()()(The use of state names derived from Native American languages is common; an estimated 27 states have names of Native American origin. )Although the origin of Alabama could be discerned, sources disagree on its meaning. An 1842 article in the Jacksonville Republican originated the idea that the meaning was Here We Rest.( This notion was popularized in the 1850s through the writings of Beaufort Meek.(  Experts in the languages have been unable to find any evidence to support such a translation.((  Scholars believe the word comes from the Choctaw alba (meaning plants or weeds) and amo (meaning to cut, to trim, or to gather).((()  The meaning may have been clearers of the thicket( or herb gatherers(() which may refer to clearing of land for cultivation( or to collecting medicinal plants.(Indigenous peoples, early historyFile:Cheaha Lake in the Fall.jpg|thumb|right|Cheaha, Alabamas highest pointpeoples of varying cultures lived in the area for thousands of years before European colonization. Trade with the Northeast via the River began during the Burial Mound Period (1000 BCAD 700) and continued until European contact.() The agrarian culture covered most of the state from AD 1000 to 1600, with one of its major centers being at the Archaeological Site in Alabama.()() Analysis of artifacts recovered from archaeological excavations at Moundville were the basis of scholars formulating the characteristics of the Ceremonial Complex (SECC).() Contrary to popular belief, the SECC appears to have no direct links to Mesoamerican culture, but developed independently. The Ceremonial Complex represents a major component of the religion of the Mississippian peoples; it is one of the primary means by which their religion is understood.()Among the historical tribes of Native American people living in the area of present-day Alabama at the time of European contact were  Iroquoian-speaking Cherokee, and the Muskogean-speaking Alabama (Alibamu), Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, Koasati, and Mobile.()European settlementThe French founded the first European settlement in the region at Old Mobile, in 1702.() The area was French from 1702 to 1763; part of British Florida from 1763 to 1780. Thomas Bassett was the first British settler in the state. He settled near what is now River in Washington County.() Alabama became part of Spanish West Florida from 1780 to 1810; part of the independent of West Florida for a short time (90 days); annexed by the U.S. and added to the of Orleans (1810); and, finally, added to the Territory in 1812. Throughout these later developments, however, the Spanish had kept a nominal (although largely ignored) governmental presence in the region, based out of Mobile. When Jacksons forces occupied Mobile in 1814 while preparing for the of New Orleans he demonstrated the United States facto authority over the region, effectively ending Spanish governance (though not its claim), while gaining an unencumbered passage to the gulf.()The area making up todays northern and central Alabama, known as the lands, had been claimed by the of Georgia after 1763. Following the Revolutionary War, it remained a part of the state of Georgia although heavily disputed. Conflicting claims to the area were held, first by several Native American tribes (most notably the Chickamauga-Cherokee and Yazoo), by other states (e.g. Carolina); and by the US federal government; Britain and Spain. In 1802, the region was joined to the Territory.  Individual statehood was delayed, however, by the territorys lack of a coastline.Statehood, Civil War and ReconstructionAlabama state capital ruins at Capital Park in Tuscaloosa Alabama became the twenty-second state admitted to the Union in 1819.  Part of the frontier in the 1820s and 1830s, its constitution provided for universal suffrage for white men. Settlers rapidly arrived to take advantage of the fertile soil. Southeastern planters and traders from the South brought slaves with them as the cotton plantations expanded. The economy of the central Black Belt (named for its dark, productive soil) was built around large cotton plantations whose owners wealth grew largely from slave labor.( The area also drew many poor, disfranchised people who became farmers. The 1860 census records show that enslaved Africans comprised 45% of the states total population of 964,201. There were only 2,690 free persons of color living in Alabama at the time.From 1826 to 1846, Tuscaloosa served as the capital of Alabama. On January 30, 1846, the Alabama legislature announced that it had voted to remove the capital city from Tuscaloosa to Montgomery. The first legislative session in the new capital met in December 1847. In time, a Capitol building was erected under the direction of a Philadelphia, Pennsylvania architect. The original structure burnt down in 1849 but was rebuilt in 1851 following the original plans.(Montgomery: History - Early Days in Montgomery, Lafayettes Visit a Local Highlight)On January 11, 1861, Alabama declared its secession from the Union and joined the States of America. While few battles were fought in the state, Alabama contributed about 120,000 soldiers to the Civil War. Alabamas slaves were freed by the 13th Amendment in 1865.() During Reconstruction, the new state legislators created a public school system for the first time, as well as establishing some welfare institutions to help its people.  Alabama was officially restored to the Union in 1868.After the Civil War, the state was still chiefly agricultural, with an economy tied to cotton.  Planters resisted working with free labor during Reconstruction and sought to re-establish controls over freedmen. In the early years the Klux Klan had numerous independent chapters in Alabama that attacked freedmen and other Republicans.  After it was suppressed, insurgent whites organized paramilitary groups, such as the Red Shirts and League, that acted more openly to suppress black voting.  Regaining power by the late 1870s, in the last decade of the 19th century, white Democrats passed electoral laws disfranchise most blacks and many poor whites.(J. Morgan Kousser.The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the Establishment of the One-Party South, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1974) Having regained power in the state legislature, Democrats passed Crow laws, including segregation in public facilities, to restore white supremacy in the society.In 1875, the state passed the Amendment, to prohibit public money from being used to finance Catholic schools.()19001960Image:FSA school in Alabama.gif|thumb|School in Alabama (Security Administration, 1935)The new 1901 of Alabama effectively disfranchised African Americans and many poor whites through voting restrictions, including literacy requirements. While the planter class had persuaded poor whites to support these legislative efforts, the new restrictions resulted in disfranchising poor whites as well, due mostly to imposition of a cumulative tax.In 1900, 14 Black Belt counties had more than 79,000 voters on the rolls. By June 1, 1903, the number of  registered voters had dropped to 1,081. In 1900, Alabama had more than 181,000 African Americans eligible to vote. By 1903, only 2,980 had qualified to register, although at least 74,000 black voters were literate.(By 1941, a total of more whites than blacks had been disfranchised: 600,000 whites to 520,000 blacks.(Glenn Feldman. The Disfranchisement Myth: Poor Whites and Suffrage Restriction in Alabama. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2004, p. 136.) Nearly all African Americans lost the ability to vote.The disfranchisement was ended  by African Americans leading the Rights Movement and gaining Federal legislation in the mid-1960s to protect their voting and civil rights.  The Rights Act of 1965 also protected the suffrage of poor whites.The rural-dominated Alabama legislature consistently underfunded schools and services for the disfranchised African Americans in the segregated state, but did not relieve them of paying taxes.() Continued racial discrimination, agricultural depression, and the failure of the cotton crops due to weevil infestation led tens of thousands of African Americans to seek opportunities in northern cities. They left Alabama in the early 20th century as part of the Great Migration to industrial jobs and better futures in northern industrial cities. The population growth rate in Alabama (see Historical Populations table below) dropped by nearly half from 1910 to 1920, reflecting the effect of emigration.At the same time, many rural whites and blacks migrated to the city of Birmingham for work in new industrial jobs. It experienced such rapid growth that it was nicknamed The Magic City.  By the 1920s, Birmingham was the 19th largest city in the U.S. and held more than 30% of the population of the state. Heavy industry and mining were the basis of the economy.()File:AlabamaWelcome.JPG|thumb|left|This structure greets drivers visiting the Alabama Welcome Center just inside the AL/GA border off of 20.Industrial development related to the demands of War II brought prosperity.( Cotton faded in importance as the state developed a manufacturing and service base. In the 1960s under Governor Wallace, many whites in the state opposed federal integration efforts in schools and public facilities.1960presentDespite massive population changes in the state from 1901 to 1961, the rural-dominated legislature refused to reapportion House and Senate seats based on population. They held on to old representation to maintain political and economic power in agricultural areas. In addition, the state legislature gerrymandered the few Birmingham legislative seats to ensure election by persons living outside Birmingham.One result was that Jefferson County, containing Birminghams industrial and economic powerhouse, contributed more than one-third of all tax revenue to the state, but did not receive a proportional amount in services.  Urban interests were consistently underrepresented in the legislature. A 1960 study noted that because of rural domination, A minority of about 25 per cent of the total state population is in majority control of the Alabama legislature.(African Americans were presumed partial to Republicans for historical reasons, but they were disfranchised. White Alabamans felt bitter towards the Republican Party in the aftermath of the Civil War and Reconstruction. These factors created a longstanding tradition that any candidate who wanted to be viable with white voters had to run as a Democrat regardless of political beliefs.During the Civil Rights Movement, African Americans achieved a protection of voting and other civil rights through the passage of the national Rights Act of 1964,() and the Rights Act of 1965. jure segregation ended in the states as Crow laws were invalidated or repealed.()Under the Voting Rights Act of 1965, cases were filed in Federal courts to force Alabama to properly redistrict by population both the House and Senate of the state legislature. In 1972, for the first time since 1901, the legislature implemented the Alabama constitutions provision for periodic redistricting based on population.  This benefited the urban areas that had developed, as well as all in the population who had been underrepresented for more than 60 years.(After 1972, the states white voters shifted much of their support to Republican candidates in presidential elections (as also occurred in neighboring southern states). Since 1990 the majority of whites in the state have voted increasingly Republican in state elections.  In 2010, Republicans won control of both houses of the legislature for the first time in 136 years.()GeographyFile:Map of Alabama terrain NA.jpg|right |thumb|Alabama terrain map: shows lakes, rivers, roads, with Cheaha (right center) east of Birmingham.Alabama is the thirtieth-largest state in the United States with  of total area: 3.19% of the area is water, making Alabama twenty-third in the amount of surface water, also giving it the second-largest inland waterway system in the United States.()  About three-fifths of the land area is a gentle plain with a general descent towards the River and the Gulf of Mexico. The Alabama region is mostly mountainous, with the River cutting a large valley creating numerous creeks, streams, rivers, mountains, and lakes.()File:Phoenix Condos view in Orange Beach Alabama.jpg|thumb|left|View of Pass from Beach The states bordering Alabama are Tennessee to the north; Georgia to the east; Florida to the south; and Mississippi to the west. Alabama has coastline at the of Mexico, in the extreme southern edge of the state.(  Alabama ranges in elevation from sea level() at Bay to over 1,800 feet (550 m) in the Mountains in the northeast. The highest point is Cheaha,( at a height of .()  Alabamas land consists of  of forest or 67% of total land area.(Alabama Forest Owners Guide to Information Resources, Introduction, Alabamaforests.org)  Suburban Baldwin County, along the Gulf Coast, is the largest county in the state in both land area and water area.()Areas in Alabama administered by the Park Service include Bend National Military Park near Alexander City; River Canyon National Preserve near Fort Payne; Cave National Monument in Bridgeport; Airmen National Historic Site in Tuskegee; and Institute National Historic Site near Tuskegee.() Additionally, Alabama has four National Forests: Conecuh, Talladega, Tuskegee, and William B. Bankhead.()  Alabama also contains the Trace Parkway, the To Montgomery National Historic Trail, and the Trail Of Tears National Historic Trail.  A notable natural wonder in Alabama is Natural Bridge rock, the longest bridge east of the Rockies, located just south of Haleyville.A -wide meteorite impact crater is located in Elmore County, just north of Montgomery. This is the crater, which is the site of Alabamas greatest natural disaster.(Wetumpka Impact Crater Wetumpka Public Library. Retrieved August 21, 2007.)  A -wide meteorite hit the area about 80 million years ago.( The hills just east of downtown Wetumpka showcase the eroded remains of the impact crater that was blasted into the bedrock, with the area labeled the Wetumpka crater or astrobleme (star-wound) because of the concentric rings of fractures and zones of shattered rock that can be found beneath the surface.(The Wetumpka Astrobleme by John C. Hall, Alabama Heritage, Fall 1996, Number 42.) In 2002, Christian Koeberl with the Institute of Geochemistry University of Vienna published evidence and established the site as an internationally recognized impact crater.(Urban areaspanorama.jpg|thumb|Birmingham, largest city and metropolitan areaHuntsville, Alabama cropped.jpg|thumb|Huntsville, second-largest metropolitan areaMobile 2008 01.jpg|thumb|Mobile, third-largest metropolitan areaAlabama panorama.jpg|thumb|Montgomery, fourth-largest metropolitan areafifth-largest metropolitan areaClimateThe state is classified as humid subtropical (Cfa) under the Koppen Climate Classification.() The average annual temperature is 64 F (18 C). Temperatures tend to be warmer in the southern part of the state with its proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, while the northern parts of the state, especially in the Appalachian Mountains in the northeast, tend to be slightly cooler.()  Generally, Alabama has very hot summers and mild winters with copious precipitation throughout the year. Alabama receives an average of  of rainfall annually and enjoys a lengthy growing season of up to 300 days in the southern part of the state.(Summers in Alabama are among the hottest in the United States, with high temperatures averaging over  throughout the summer in some parts of the state. Alabama is also prone to storms and even hurricanes. Areas of the state far away from the Gulf are not immune to the effects of the storms, which often dump tremendous amounts of rain as they move inland and weaken.File:Alabama winter 2008.jpg|thumb|right|Though winters in the state are usually mild, nightly freezing occurs frequently in the Alabama region. This is shown in this picture taken at the Old State Bank in Decatur during early January.South Alabama reports many thunderstorms. The Gulf Coast, around Mobile Bay, averages between 70 and 80 days per year with thunder reported. This activity decreases somewhat further north in the state, but even the far north of the state reports thunder on about 60 days per year. Occasionally, thunderstorms are severe with frequent lightning and large hail  the central and northern parts of the state are most vulnerable to this type of storm. Alabama ranks seventh in the number of deaths from lightning and ninth in the number of deaths from lightning strikes per capita.(Lightning Fatalities, Injuries and Damages in the United States, 19902003. NLSI. Retrieved May 8, 2007.)Alabama, along with Kansas, has the most reported EF5 tornadoes of any state  according to statistics from the Climatic Data Center for the period January 1, 1950, to October 31, 2006.(Fujita scale. Tornadoproject.com. Retrieved September 3, 2007.) Several long  tracked F5 tornadoes have contributed to Alabama reporting more tornado fatalities than any other state, even surpassing Texas which has a much larger area within Alley.  The state suffered damage in the Outbreak of April 1974, and the 2528, 2011 tornado outbreak.The peak season for tornadoes varies from the northern to southern parts of the state.  Alabama is one of the few places in the world that has a secondary tornado season in November and December, along with the spring severe weather season. The northern part of the state  along the Tennessee Valley  is one of the areas in the U.S. most vulnerable to violent tornadoes. The area of Alabama and Mississippi most affected by tornadoes is sometimes referred to as Alley, as distinct from the Alley of the Southern Plains.Winters are generally mild in Alabama, as they are throughout most of the United States, with average January low temperatures around  in Mobile and around  in Birmingham. Although snow is a rare event in much of Alabama, areas of the state north of Montgomery may receive a dusting of snow a few times every winter, with an occasional moderately heavy snowfall every few years.  Historic snowfall events include Years Eve 1963 snowstorm and the Storm of the Century.  The annual average snowfall for the Birmingham area is  per year.  In the southern Gulf coast, snowfall is less frequent, sometimes going several years without any snowfall.{| classwikitable collapsible collapsed stylewidth:90%; text-align:center; font-size:90%; line-height: 1.1em; margin:auto;|-!colspan16| Monthly normal high and low temperatures for various Alabama cities (C)|-!colspan2| Month! Jan! Feb! Mar! Apr! May! Jun! Jul! Aug! Sep! Oct! Nov! Dec!styleborder-left-width:medium |Year|rowspan11| places|-!rowspan2| Huntsville! Average high|style| 48.9(9.4)|style| 54.6(12.6)|style| 63.4(17.4)|style| 72.3(22.4)|style| 79.6(26.4)|style| 86.5(30.3)|style| 89.4(31.9)|style| 89.0(31.7)|style| 83.0(28.3)|style| 72.9(22.7)|style| 61.6(16.4)|style| 52.4(11.3)|style border-left-width:medium| 71.1(21.7)|-! Average low|style| 30.7(-0.7)|style| 34.0(1.1)|style| 41.2(5.1)|style| 48.4(9.1)|style| 57.5(14.2)|style| 65.4(18.6)|style| 69.5(20.8)|style| 68.1(20.1)|style| 61.7(16.5)|style| 49.6(9.8)|style| 40.7(4.8)|style| 33.8(1.0)|style border-left-width:medium| 50.1(10.1)|-!rowspan2| Birmingham! Average high|style| 52.8(11.6)|style| 58.3(14.6)|style| 66.5(19.2)|style| 74.1(23.4)|style| 81.0(27.2)|style| 87.5(30.8)|style| 90.6(32.6)|style| 90.2(32.3)|style| 84.6(29.2)|style| 74.9(23.8)|style| 64.5(18.1)|style| 56.0(13.3)|style border-left-width:medium| 73.4(23.0)|-! Average low|style| 32.3(0.2)|style| 35.4(1.9)|style| 42.4(5.8)|style| 48.4(9.1)|style| 57.6(14.2)|style| 65.4(18.6)|style| 69.7(20.9)|style| 68.9(20.5)|style| 63.0(17.2)|style| 50.9(10.5)|style| 41.8(5.4)|style| 35.2(1.8)|style border-left-width:medium| 50.9(10.5)|-!rowspan2| Montgomery! Average high|style| 57.6(14.2)|style| 62.4(16.9)|style| 70.5(21.4)|style| 77.5(25.3)|style| 84.6(29.2)|style| 90.6(32.6)|style| 92.7(33.7)|style| 92.2(33.4)|style| 87.7(30.9)|style| 78.7(25.9)|style| 68.7(20.4)|style| 60.3(15.7)|style border-left-width:medium| 77.0(25.0)|-! Average low|style| 35.5(1.9)|style| 38.6(3.7)|style| 45.4(7.4)|style| 52.1(11.2)|style| 60.1(15.6)|style| 67.3(19.6)|style| 70.9(21.6)|style| 70.1(21.2)|style| 64.9(18.3)|style| 52.2(11.2)|style| 43.5(6.4)|style| 37.6(3.1)|style border-left-width:medium| 53.2(11.8)|-!rowspan2| Mobile! Average high|style| 60.7(15.9)|style| 64.5(18.1)|style| 71.2(21.8)|style| 77.4(25.2)|style| 84.2(29.0)|style| 89.4(31.9)|style| 91.2(32.9)|style| 90.8(32.7)|style| 86.8(30.4)|style| 79.2(26.2)|style| 70.1(21.2)|style| 62.9(17.2)|style border-left-width:medium| 77.4(25.2)|-! Average low|style| 39.5(4.2)|style| 42.4(5.8)|style| 49.2(9.6)|style| 54.8(12.7)|style| 62.8(17.1)|style| 69.2(20.7)|style| 71.8(22.1)|style| 71.7(22.0)|style| 67.6(19.8)|style| 56.3(13.5)|style| 47.8(8.8)|style| 41.6(5.3)|style border-left-width:medium| 56.2(13.4)|-|colspan15 styletext-align:center;font-size:85%| Source: NOAA()()()()|}Demographicsfootnote  Sources: 1910-2010()The States Census Bureau, as of July 1, 2008, estimated Alabamas population at 4,661,900,() which represents an increase of 214,545, or 4.8%, since the last census in 2000.() This includes a natural increase since the last census of 121,054 people (that is 502,457 births minus 381,403 deaths) and an increase due to net migration of 104,991 people into the state.( Immigration from outside the United States resulted in a net increase of 31,180 people, and migration within the country produced a net gain of 73,811 people.(  The state had 108,000 foreign-born (2.4% of the state population), of which an estimated 22.2% were illegal immigrants (24,000).The of population of Alabama is located in Chilton County, outside of the town of Jemison.()Race and ancestryAccording to the U.S. Census, Alabama had a population of 4,779,736. In terms of race and ethnicity, the state was 68.5% White (67.0% Non-Hispanic White Alone), 26.2% Black or African American, 0.6% American Indian and Alaska Native, 1.1% Asian, 0.1% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, 2.0% from Some Other Race, and 1.5% from Two or More Races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race made up 3.9% of the population.()The largest reported ancestry groups in Alabama are: American (26.2%), English (23.6%), Irish (7.7%), German (5.7%), and Scots-Irish (2.0%).()()()  In the 2000 Census, 621,080 people claimed to be of American ancestry, most them are of overwhelmingly English extraction, however most English Americans identify simply as having ethnicity because their roots have been in North America as long as the early 1600s. Demographers estimate that roughly 23% of people in Alabama are of predominantly English ancestry.()(Reynolds Farley, The New Census Question about Ancestry: What Did It Tell Us?, Demography, Vol. 28, No. 3 (August 1991), pp. 414, 421.)(Stanley Lieberson and Lawrence Santi, The Use of Nativity Data to Estimate Ethnic Characteristics and Patterns, Social Science Research, Vol. 14, No. 1 (1985), pp. 44-6.)(Stanley Lieberson and Mary C. Waters, Ethnic Groups in Flux: The Changing Ethnic Responses of American Whites, Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 487, No. 79 (September 1986), pp. 8286.)  There are also many more people in Alabama of Scots-Irish origins than are self-reported.(In 1984, under the DavisStrong Act, Alabama established a state Indian Commission and officially recognized seven American Indian tribes, including the Echota Cherokee Tribe of Alabama, which is a 501 (c3) group. It is made up of descendants of the Chickamauga Cherokee and others who managed to evade Removal in the 1830s. Working with University, the tribe has begun a revival of the language.ReligionAlabama is located in the middle of the Belt. A majority of people in Alabama today identify as Protestant. As of 2000, the three largest denominational groups in Alabama are Protestant, Protestant, and Catholic. The Baptist Convention has the highest number of adherents in Alabama with 1,380,121, followed by the Methodist Church with 327,734 members, and the Church with 150,647 adherents.()In a 2007 survey, nearly 70% of respondents could name all four of the Christian Gospels. Of those who indicated a religious preference, 59% said they possessed a full understanding of their faith and needed no further learning.()  In a 2007 poll, 92% of Alabamians reported having at least some confidence in churches in the state.()()  In the 2008 American Religious Identification Survey, 80% of Alabama respondents reported their religion as Christian (other than Catholic,) 6% as Catholic, and 11% as having no religion at all.()HealthA for Disease Control and Prevention study showed that Alabama was one of the worst in the country for obesity with most counties having over 29% of adults obese, except for ten which exceeded 26%.() Residents were least likely of any state in the nation to exercise.() Alabama has one of the highest incidents of adult onset diabetes in the country, exceeding 10% of adults.()()EconomyThe state has invested in aerospace, education, health care, and banking, and various heavy industries, including automobile manufacturing, mineral extraction, steel production and fabrication. According to the United States of Economic Analysis, the 2008 total state product was $170 billion, or $29,411 per capita. Alabamas 2008 GDP increased 0.7% from the previous year. The single largest increase came in the area of information.( full release with tables)  In 1999, capita income for the state was $18,189.()As of September 2010, the states unemployment rate is 8.9%.(Bls.gov; Local Area Unemployment Statistics)AgricultureAlabamas agricultural outputs include poultry and eggs, cattle, plant nursery items, peanuts, cotton, grains such as corn and sorghum, vegetables, milk, soybeans, and peaches. Although known as The Cotton State, Alabama ranks between eighth and tenth in national cotton production, according to various reports,()() with Texas, Georgia and Mississippi comprising the top three.IndustryFile:USSRC Rocket Park.JPG|thumb|left|Space & Rocket Center in Huntsville Alabamas industrial outputs include iron and steel products (including cast-iron and steel pipe); paper, lumber, and wood products; mining (mostly coal); plastic products; cars and trucks; and apparel. Also, Alabama produces aerospace and electronic products, mostly in the Huntsville area, location of NASAs C. Marshall Space Flight Center and the US Army Aviation and Missile Command, headquartered at Arsenal.Most Alabamas economic growth is due to the states expanding automotive manufacturing industry. Located in the state are Manufacturing of Alabama, Motor Manufacturing Alabama, U.S. International, and Motor Manufacturing Alabama, as well as their various suppliers.  Since 1993, the automobile industry has generated more than 67,800 new jobs in the state. Alabama currently ranks 4th in the nation in automobile output.()Steel producers Nucor, SSAB, ThyssenKrupp, and Steel have facilities in Alabama and employ over 10,000 people.  In May 2007, German steelmaker ThyssenKrupp selected Alabama for a $3.7 billion steel production plant, with the promise of 2,700 permanent jobs.() When ThyssenKrupps new facilities reach full production capacity, Alabama is expected to become the third largest steel producing state in the country behind Indiana and Pennsylvania.(http://www.alalabor.state.al.us/PDFs/SteelCouncilNewsletter.pdf) Alabamas industrial and manufacturing plants includes BFGoodrich Tire Manufacturing, Materials Corporation, Refining Company, and JVC America.TourismAn estimated 100,000 tourists annually from other countries visit the state, including from Canada, England, Germany and Japan. In 2006, 22.3 million tourists spent $8.3 billion providing an estimated 162,000 jobs in the state.(Encyclopedia of Alabama: Alabama Tourism Department (ATD))(http://www.800alabama.com/about-alabama/alabama-news-facts/frequently-asked-questions/)()HealthHospital is the only Level I trauma center in Alabama.()(https://webspace.utexas.edu/jas5349/Research_Data.htm))  UAB is the largest employer in Alabama, with a workforce of about 20,000.BankingAlabama has the headquarters of Financial Corporation, Compass and Bancorp. Birmingham-based Compass Banchshares was acquired by Spanish-based BBVA in September 2007, although the headquarters of BBVA Compass remains in Birmingham. In November 2006, Regions Financial completed its merger with Bancorporation, which was also headquartered in Birmingham. Corporation, another large bank headquartered in Birmingham, was acquired by Wachovia in 2004 for $14.3 billion. The city still has major operations for Wachovia and its now post-operating bank Fargo, which includes a regional headquarters, a operations center campus and a $400 million dollar data center. Nearly a dozen smaller banks are also headquartered in the Birmingham, such as Superior Bancorp, ServisFirst and New South Federal Savings Bank. Birmingham also serves as the headquarters for several large investment management companies, including Management Corporation.ElectronicsTelecommunications provider AT&T, formerly BellSouth, also has a major presence in Alabama with several large offices in Birmingham. The company has over 6,000 employees and more than 1,200 contract employees.Many commercial technology companies are headquartered in Huntsville, such as the network access company ADTRAN, computer graphics company Intergraph, design and manufacturer of IT infrastructure Avocent, and telecommunications provider Deltacom. Cinram manufactures and distributes 20th Century Fox DVDs and Blu-ray Discs out of their Huntsville plant.ConstructionRust International has grown to include & Gorrie, BE&K, Construction and Harbert International, which all routinely are included in the Engineering News-Record lists of top design, international construction, and engineering firms. (Rust International was acquired in 2000 by Group International, which was in turn acquired by San-Francisco based Corporation in 2007.)TransportationThe of Mobile, Alabamas only saltwater port, is a busy seaport on the of Mexico with inland waterway access to the Midwest by way of the Waterway.  The Port of Mobile is currently the 9th-largest by tonnage in the United States.()Barge transportation in and out of the Port of Tuscaloosa and other commercial navigation make the Warrior River useful in the state of Alabama.Law and governmentstate capitol, Montgomery.jpg|thumb|The State Capitol, built in 1850State governmentThe foundational document for Alabamas government is the Constitution, which was ratified in 1901. At almost 800 amendments and 310,000 words, it is the worlds longest constitution and is roughly forty times the length of the Constitution.()()  There is a significant movement to rewrite and modernize Alabamas constitution.() This movement is based upon the fact that Alabamas constitution highly centralizes power in Montgomery and leaves practically no power in local hands. Any policy changes proposed around the state must be approved by the entire Alabama legislature and, frequently, by state referendum. One criticism of the current constitution claims that its complexity and length were intentional to codify segregation and racism.Alabama is divided into three equal branches:The branch is the Legislature, a bicameral assembly composed of the House of Representatives, with 105 members, and the Senate, with 35 members. The Legislature is responsible for writing, debating, passing, or defeating state legislation.The branch is responsible for the execution and oversight of laws. It is headed by the of Alabama. Other members of executive branch include the cabinet, the General of Alabama, the Secretary of State, the Commissioner of Agriculture and Industries, the State Treasurer, and the Auditor of Alabama.The branch is responsible for interpreting the Constitution and applying the law in state criminal and civil cases. The highest court is the Court of Alabama.TaxesAlabama levies a 2, 4, or 5 percent personal income tax, depending upon the amount earned and filing status. Taxpayers are not allowed to deduct their federal income tax from their Alabama state tax, but can deduct federal Social Security and Medicare taxes.The states general sales tax rate is 4%.(Comparison of State and Local Retail Sales Taxes, July 2004 Retrieved on May 25, 2007.) The collection rate could be substantially higher, depending upon additional city and county sales taxes. For example, the total sales tax rate in Mobile is 10% and there is an additional restaurant tax of 1%, which means that a diner in Mobile would pay a 11% tax on a meal. Sales and excise taxes in Alabama account for 51% of all state and local revenue, compared with an average of about 36% nationwide. Alabama is also one of the few remaining states that levies a tax on food and medicine. Alabamas income tax on poor working families is among the nations very highest.() Alabama is the only state that levies income tax on a family of four with income as low as $4,600, which is barely one-quarter of the federal poverty line.( Alabamas threshold is the lowest among the 41 states and the District of Columbia with income taxes.(The corporate income tax rate is currently 6.5%. The overall federal, state, and local tax burden in Alabama ranks the state as the second least tax-burdened state in the country.()  taxes are the lowest in the United States. The current state constitution requires a voter referendum to raise property taxes.Since Alabamas tax structure largely depends on consumer spending, it is subject to high variable budget structure. For example, in 2003 Alabama had an annual budget deficit as high as $670 million.Local and county governmentAlabama has 67 counties. Each county has its own elected legislative branch, usually called the County Commission, which usually also has executive authority in the county. Because of the restraints placed in the Constitution, all but seven counties (Jefferson, Lee, Mobile, Madison, Montgomery, Shelby, and Tuscaloosa) in the state have little to no rule. Instead, most counties in the state must lobby the Local Legislation Committee of the state legislature to get simple local policies such as waste disposal to land use zoning.Alabama is an beverage control state; the government holds a monopoly on the sale of alcohol. However, counties can declare themselves dry; the state does not sell alcohol in those areas.*of counties in AlabamaPoliticsThe current governor of the state is Republican Robert Bentley. The lieutenant governor is Republican Ivey. The Chief Justice of the Alabama Supreme Court is Democrat Bell Cobb. The Republican Party currently holds a majority in both houses of the Legislature. The Legislature has the power to override a gubernatorial veto by a simple majority (most state Legislatures require a two-thirds majority to override a veto).During Reconstruction following the Civil War, Alabama was occupied by federal troops of the Military District under General John Pope. In 1874, the political coalition known as the Redeemers took control of the state government from the Republicans, in part by suppressing the African American vote.After 1890, a coalition of whites passed laws to segregate and disenfranchise black residents, a process completed in provisions of the 1901 constitution. Provisions which disfranchised African Americans also disfranchised poor whites, however. By 1941 more whites than blacks had been disfranchised: 600,000 to 520,000, although the impact was greater on the African-American community, as almost all of its citizens were disfranchised.From 1901 through the 1960s, the state did not redraw election districts as population grew and shifted within the state. The result was a rural minority that dominated state politics until a series of court cases required redistricting in 1972.Alabama state politics gained nationwide and international attention in the 1950s and 1960s during the American Civil Rights Movement, when majority whites bureaucratically, and at times, violently resisted protests for electoral and social reform. Wallace, the states only four-term governor, was a  controversial figure. Only with the passage of the Federal Rights Act of 1964( and Rights Act of 1965 did African Americans regain suffrage and other civil rights.In 2007, the Legislature passed, and Republican Governor Riley signed, a resolution expressing profound regret over slavery and its lingering impact. In a symbolic ceremony, the bill was signed in the State Capitol, which housed Congress of the States of America.()State electionsWith the disfranchisement of African Americans, the state became part of the South, a one-party system in which the Democratic Party became essentially the only political party in every Southern state. For nearly 100 years, local and state elections in Alabama were decided in the Democratic Party primary, with generally only token Republican challengers running in the General Election.Developments in the 1986 Democratic primary election led to the election of the first Republican Governor in more than 100 years and started Republicans on the road to political dominance in the state.  One million voters cast ballots in the 1986 Democratic primary. The then-incumbent Lieutenant Governor, Baxley, lost the Democratic nomination for Governor by approximately 8,000 votes to then fellow Democratic Attorney General Graddick. The state Democratic partys five-member election contest committee invalidated the primary election result claiming that thousands of Republicans had illegally voted in the Democratic primary for Graddick and as a result they removed Graddick from the ballot.  The Democratic Party then placed Baxleys name on the ballot as the Democratic candidate instead of Graddick. The voters of the state revolted at what they perceived as disenfranchisement of their right to vote and elected the Republican challenger Hunt as Governor.(Stovall, Cotter, & Fisher, Alabama Political Almanac, p. 260, 1995) Hunt had been nominated in a statewide Republican primary that had 28,000 participants compared to the 1,000,000 plus of the Democratic primary.  That November Hunt became the first Republican Governor elected in Alabama since Reconstruction when he won 57% of the vote statewide against Baxley.Since 1986, Republicans have won six of the seven Governors elections and become increasingly competitive in Alabama politics at many levels.   They currently control both seats in the U.S. Senate and six out of the states seven congressional seats.Republicans hold all nine seats on the Supreme Court () and all ten seats on the state appellate courts.  Until 1994, no Republicans held any of the court seats. This change also began, likely in part, due to the same perception by voters of Democratic party efforts to disenfranchise voters again in 1994.  In that general election, the then-incumbent Chief Justice of Alabama, Sonny Hornsby, refused to leave office after losing the election by approximately 3,000 votes to Republican Oliver Hooper, Sr.  Hornsby sued Alabama in court and defiantly remained in office for more than a year before finally giving up the seat after losing in court.  This ultimately would lead to a collapse of support for Democrats at the ballot box in the next three or four election cycles and ultimately losing the last of the nineteen court seats following the resignation of the last Democrat in August, 2011.Today, Republicans also hold all seven of the statewide elected executive branch offices.  Republicans also hold six of the eight elected seats on the State Board of Education.  In 2010, Republicans took large majorities of both chambers of the state legislature giving them control of that body for the first time in 136 years.  However, Democrats hold one of the three seats on the Alabama Public Service Commission.()()()Only two Republican Lieutenant Governors have been elected since Reconstruction, Windom and Ivey, the current Lieutenant Governor. Windom served as Lt. Governor under Democratic Gov. Siegelman.  Before 2011, the last time that Alabama had a governor and Lieutenant Governor of the same party was the period between 1983 and 1987 when Wallace was serving his fourth term as governor and Baxley was serving as Lieutenant Governor; both were Democrats.In Alabama, the members of the Legislature take office immediately after the November elections, but the statewide officials, such as the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Attorney General, and other constitutional offices take office in the following January.()Local electionsMany local offices (County Commissioners, Boards of Education, Tax Assessors, Tax Collectors, etc.) in the state are still held by Democrats. Local elections in most rural counties are generally decided in the Democratic primary and local elections in metropolitan and suburban counties are generally decided in the Republican Primary, although there are exceptions.()()Alabamas 67 County Sheriffs are elected in partisan races and Democrats still retain the majority of those posts.  The current split is 42 Democrats, 24 Republicans, and 1 Independent (Choctaw).(Alabama Sheriffs Association)  However, most of the Democratic sheriffs preside over rural and less populated counties and the majority of Republican sheriffs preside over more urban/suburban and heavily populated counties.() Two Alabama counties (Montgomery and Calhoun) with a population of over 100,000 have Democratic sheriffs and five Alabama counties with a population of under 75,000 have Republican sheriffs (Autauga, Coffee, Dale, Coosa, and Blount).()  The state has one female sheriff (Morgan) and 9 African-American sheriffs.(Alabama Sheriffs Association)Federal electionsFrom 1876 through 1956, Alabama supported only Democratic presidential candidates, by large margins. In 1960, the Democrats won with F. Kennedy on the ballot, but the Democratic electors from Alabama gave 6 of their 11 electoral votes as a protest to Harry Byrd. In 1964, Republican Goldwater carried the state.In the 1968 presidential election, Alabama supported native son and Independent Party candidate Wallace over both Nixon and Humphrey. Wallace was the official Democratic candidate in Alabama, while Humphrey was listed as the National Democratic.() In 1976, Democratic candidate Carter from Georgia carried the state, the region, and the nation, but Democratic control of the region slipped after that.Since 1980, conservative Alabama voters have increasingly voted for Republican candidates at the Federal level, especially in Presidential elections. By contrast, Democratic candidates have been elected to many state-level offices and until 2010 comprised a longstanding majority in the Legislature; see Dixiecrat.In 2004, W. Bush won Alabamas nine electoral votes by a margin of 25 percentage points with 62.5% of the vote, mostly white voters. The 11 counties that voted Democratic were Black Belt counties, where African Americans are the majority racial group.The states two U.S. senators are Jefferson B. Sessions III and Richard C. Shelby, both Republicans.In the House of Representatives, the state is represented by seven members, six of whom are Republicans: (Bonner, D. Rogers, Aderholt, J. Brooks, Roby, and Bachus) and one Democrat: Sewell).EducationPrimary and secondary educationPublic primary and secondary education in Alabama is under the overview of the State Board of Education as well as local oversight by 67 county school boards and 60 city boards of education. Together, 1,541 individual schools provide education for 743,364 elementary and secondary students.()Public school funding is appropriated through the Alabama Legislature through the Education Trust Fund. In FY 20062007, Alabama appropriated $3,775,163,578 for primary and secondary education. That represented an increase of $444,736,387 over the previous fiscal year.( In 2007, over 82 percent of schools made adequate yearly progress (AYP) toward student proficiency under the National Child Left Behind law, using measures determined by the State of Alabama. In 2004, 23 percent of schools met AYP.()While Alabamas public education system has improved, it lags behind in achievement compared to other states. According to U.S. Census data, Alabamas high school graduation rate  75%  is the second lowest in the United States (after Mississippi).(http://www.census.gov/prod/2003pubs/c2kbr-24.pdf)  The largest educational gains were among people with some college education but without degrees.(Education Statistics. CensusScope.org)File:Harrison-plaza2.jpg|right|thumb|Harrison Plaza at the of North Alabama in Florence. The school was chartered as LaGrange College by the Legislature in 1830.Colleges and universitiesAlabamas programs of higher education include 14 four-year public universities, two-year community colleges, and 17 private, undergraduate and graduate universities. In the state are three medical schools (of Alabama at Birmingham, of Alabama and of South Alabama), two veterinary colleges (University and University), a dental school (of Alabama at Birmingham), an optometry college (of Alabama at Birmingham), two pharmacy schools (University and University), and five law schools (of Alabama School of Law, School of Law, School of Law, Law School, and the Goode Jones School of Law).  Public, post-secondary education in Alabama is overseen by the Alabama Commission on Higher Education. Colleges and universities in Alabama offer degree programs from two-year associate degrees to 16 doctoral level programs.( )()The largest single campus is the of Alabama, located in Tuscaloosa, with 31,747 enrolled for fall 2011.(http://www.wtvy.com/home/headlines/University_of_Alabama_Reaches_Record_Enrollment_this_Fall_129916513.html) University is the largest institution in the state, enrolling 29,689 students (as of 2010) across four Alabama campuses (Troy, Dothan, Montgomery, and Phenix City), as well as sixty learning sites in seventeen other states and eleven other countries.  The oldest institutions are the public of North Alabama in Florence and the Catholic Church-affiliated Hill College in Mobile, both founded in 1830.()()Accreditation of academic programs is through the Association of Colleges and Schools (SACS) as well as other subject-focused national and international accreditation agencies such as the for Biblical Higher Education (ABHE),() the on Occupational Education (COE),()  and the Council for Independent Colleges and Schools (ACICS).()According to the 2011 News and World Report, Alabama had three universities ranked in the top 100 Public Schools in America (University of Alabama at 31, University at 36, and of Alabama at Birmingham at 73).()SportsProfessional sports teamsFile:Hank Aaron Stadium.jpg|160px|thumb|right|Aaron Stadium in MobileFile:Von Braun Center Arena Dec10.jpg|160px|thumb|right|Braun Center in HuntsvilleAlabama has several league professional teams including four league baseball teams.TransportationFile:BHM tower and terminal.jpg|thumb|left|International Airport Air transportationMajor airports in Alabama include International Airport (BHM), International Airport (HSV), Regional Airport (DHN), Regional Airport (MOB), Regional Airport (MGM), Muscle Shoals  Northwest Alabama Regional Airport (MSL), Regional Airport (TCL), and Field Regional Airport (DCU).RailFor rail transport, Amtrak schedules the Crescent, a daily passenger train, running from New York to New Orleans with stops at Anniston, Birmingham, and Tuscaloosa.RoadsFile:I20I59Birmingham.JPG|thumb|right|59 (co-signed with 20) approaching 65 in downtown Birmingham.Alabama has five major interstate roads that cross the state: I-65 runs northsouth roughly through the middle of the state; I-59/I-20 travels from the central west border to Birmingham, where I-59 continues to the north-east corner of the state and I-20 continues east towards Atlanta; I-85 originates in Montgomery and runs east-northeast to the Georgia border, providing a main thoroughfare to Atlanta; and I-10 traverses the southernmost portion of the state, running from west to east through Mobile. Another interstate road, I-22, is currently under construction. When completed around 2012 it will connect Birmingham with Tennessee.  Several U.S.Highways also pass through the state, such as US 11, US 29, US 31, US 43, US 72, US 78, US 80, US 82, US 84, US 90, US 98, US 231, US 278, US 280, and US 431.There are four toll roads in the state: Alabama River Parkway in Montgomery; Black Warrior Parkway in Tuscaloosa; Emerald Mountain Expressway in Montgomery; Foley Beach Express in Foley; Montgomery Expressway in Montgomery and four toll bridges: Alabama River Parkway Bridge in Montgomery; Black Warrior Parkway Bridge in Tuscaloosa; Emerald Mountain Expressway Bridge in Montgomery; and Foley Beach Express Bridge in Foley.In March 2011, Alabama ranked among the top five Worst states on the American State Litter Scorecard, for overall poor effectiveness and quality of its statewide public space cleanlinessprimarily roadway and adjacent litter removalsfrom state and related efforts.(S. Spacek, 2011 American State Litter Scorecard: New Rankings for an Increasingly Environmentally Concerned Populace.)PortsAlabama has one sea port in Mobile on the of Mexico.  The states other ports are on rivers with access to the Gulf.Water Ports of Alabama, listed from north to southSee also*of people from Alabama*Register of Historic Places listings in AlabamaReferencesFurther reading:For a detailed bibliography, see the of Alabama.*Atkins, Leah Rawls, Wayne Flynt, William Warren Rogers, and David Ward. Alabama: The History of a Deep South State (1994)*Flynt, Wayne. Alabama in the Twentieth Century (2004)*Owen Thomas M. History of Alabama and Dictionary of Alabama Biography 4 vols. 1921.*Jackson, Harvey H. Inside Alabama: A Personal History of My State (2004)*Mohl, Raymond A. Latinization in the Heart of Dixie: Hispanics in Late-twentieth-century Alabama Alabama Review 2002 55(4): 243274. ISSN 0002-4341*Peirce, Neal R. The Deep South States of America: People, Politics, and Power in the Seven Deep South States (1974). Information on politics and economics 196072.*Williams, Benjamin Buford. A Literary History of Alabama: The Nineteenth Century 1979.*WPA. Guide to Alabama (1939)External links*Alabama.gov  Official website.*Alabama State Guide, from the Library of Congress*Alabama Association of Regional Councils*Energy Data & Statistics for Alabama- From the U.S. Department of Energy*TourAlabama.org  Alabama Department of Tourism and Travel*All About Alabama, at the Department of Archives and History*AlabamaMosaic, a digital repository of materials on Alabamas history, culture, places, and people*Code of Alabama 1975  at the Alabama Legislature site**USGS real-time, geographic, and other scientific resources of Alabama*Alabama QuickFacts from the U.S. Census Bureau*Alabama State Fact Sheet from the U.S. Department of Agriculture Southeast list af:Alabamaang:Alabamaar:an:Alabamaarc:frp:Alabamaast:Alabamaaz:Alabamabn:zh-min-nan:Alabamabe-x-old:bh:bcl:Alabamabi:Alabamabo:bs:Alabama(stad)bg:ca:Alabama()cs:Alabamaco:Alabamacy:Alabamada:Alabamade:AlabamaHahoodzoet:Alabamael:es:Alabamaeo:Alabamoeu:Alabamafa:hif:Alabamafo:Alabamafr:Alabamafy:Alabamaga:Alabamagv:Alabamagag:Alabamagd:Alabamagl:Alabamagu:hak:-l-p-mhaw:Alapama()hi:hr:Alabamaio:Alabamaig:Alabamabpy:id:Alabamaia:Alabamaie:Alabamaiu:/aalaapaamaaik:Alabama()is:Alabamait:Alabamahe:jv:Alabamakn:pam:Alabamaka:kw:Alabamasw:Alabamaht:Alabamaku:Alabamalad:Alabamala:Alabamalv:Alabama(Bundesstaat)lt:Alabamalij:Alabamm-ali:Alabamajbo:alybamaslmo:Alabamahu:Alabamamk:mg:Alabamaml:mi:Alabamamr:arz:ms:Alabamamwl:Alabamamn:nah:Alabama()nl:Alabama(stoat)ja:nap:Alabamafrr:Alabamano:Alabamann:Alabamaoc:Alabamauz:Alabamapnb:pap:Alabamapms:Alabamands:Alabamapl:Alabamapt:Alabamaro:Alabamarm:Alabamasuyuru:sah:sa:sq:Alabamascn:Alabamasimple:Alabamask:Alabamasl:Alabamaszl:Alabamaso:Alabamackb:sr:sh:Alabamafi:Alabamasv:Alabamatl:Alabamata:tt:te:th:tr:Alabamauk:ur:Shitativi:Alabamavo:Alabamawar:Alabamayi:Alabamadiq:Alabamabat-smg:Alabamazh:
359
List_of_Atlas_Shrugged_characters
This is a list of characters in Rands novel Shrugged.Major charactersThe following are major characters from the novel.(Characters are listed as major if they meet one of the following criteria:*they are listed as major characters in a widely available study guide, such as CliffsNotes, SparkNotes, or Gales Novels for Students;*they are listed as primary heroic or arch-villain characters in Gladsteins The New Ayn Rand Companion;*they are the focus of an essay in a scholarly book about the novel, such as Essays on Ayn Rands Atlas Shrugged or Ayn Rands Atlas Shrugged.)ProtagonistsDagny TaggartImage:Taylor-Schilling-as-Dagny-Taggart.jpg|thumb|upright0.56|right|Schilling as Dagny Taggart in the 2011 film.Dagny Taggart is the protagonist of the novel. She is Vice-President in Charge of Operations for Taggart Transcontinental, under her brother, James Taggart. However, due to James incompetence, it is Dagny who is responsible for all the workings of the railroad.Dagny has three romantic relationships, each with a man of ability: dAnconia, Rearden, and Galt. Galt marks the pinnacle of everything Dagny seeks in the world and is the kind of man alluded to in her youth when she imagines a man standing off in the distance, at the end of a great set of railroad tracks and all her struggles.The essential drama of Dagnys character is her struggle to reconcile the life she lives and the railroad which she loves with the moral code of those who wish to destroy it. She believes these destroyers simply want to heap burdens upon her for the sake of others, which she has the ability to carry. Like Hank, she believes they want to live, but are too stupid and incompetent to realize how their duties and altruistic projects impede that goal. It is not until she sees the man most important to her in the world - John Galt - strapped to a torture machine, about to be killed by the looters (who recognize, too, that he is the only man who can save them from economic collapse), that she realizes that the moral code of the looters is one of death: they recognize what is good and necessary for life, but wish to destroy it anyway.She is a typical heroine, similar to Francon (The Fountainhead) or Argounova (We the Living).Francisco dAnconiaFrancisco dAnconia is one of the central characters in Atlas Shrugged, and owner by inheritance of the worlds largest copper mining empire. He is a childhood friend, and the first love, of Dagny Taggart.A child prodigy of exceptional talents, Francisco was dubbed the climax of the dAnconia line, an already prestigious family of skilled industrialists. He attended Patrick Henry University and was a classmate of John Galt and Ragnar Danneskjld and student of both Hugh Akston and Robert Stadler. He began working at a young age, while still in school, proving that he could have made a successful career on his own merits without the aid of his familys wealth and power. Francisco is one of the strikers and is slowly destroying the dAnconia empire to put it out of the raiders reach. His actions were designed both to trap looters into relying upon his worthless ventures in order to disrupt their schemes and to try to show the inevitable consequences of looting. He adopted the persona of a worthless playboy, by which he is known to the world, as an effective cover. However, he is forced to give up Dagny, knowing that she would not be ready to join the strikers. He remains deeply in love with her throughout the book, while also being a good and loyal friend of her other two lovers, Hank Rearden and John Galt.His full name is Francisco Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastian dAnconia.John GaltThe enigmatic John Galt is the primary male hero of Atlas Shrugged. He initially appears as an unnamed menial worker for Taggart Transcontinental, who often dines with Eddie Willers in the employees cafeteria, and leads Eddie to reveal important information about Dagny Taggart and Taggart Transcontinental. Only Eddies side of their conversations is given in the novel. Eddie tells him which suppliers and contractors Dagny is most dependent on; these men are consistently the next to disappear. Later in the novel, the reader discovers this workers true identity.Henry Hank ReardenHenry (also known as Hank) is one of the central characters in Shrugged. Like many of Rands capitalist characters, he is a self-made man. He owns the most important steel company in the United States. He invents Rearden Metal, an alloy stronger than steel (with similar properties to stainless steel). He lives in Philadelphia with his wife Lillian, his brother Philip, and his elderly mother, all of whom he supports.Hank Rearden knows something is wrong with the world but he is unable to define the problem. His friend, Francisco dAnconia, helps him understand and by this mechanism the reader is also prepared to understand the secret when it is revealed explicitly in Galts Speech. Rearden also serves to illustrate Rands theory of sex. Lillian Rearden cannot appreciate Hank Reardens virtues, and she is portrayed as being disgusted by sex. Dagny Taggart clearly does appreciate Reardens virtues, and this appreciation evolves into sexual desire. Rearden is torn because he accepts the premises of the traditional view of sex as a lower instinct, but he responds sexually to Dagny, who represents his highest values. Rearden struggles to resolve this internal conflict, and in doing so, illustrates Rands sexual theory.Ragnar DanneskjldOne of the original strikers, he is now world famous as a pirate. Ragnar attended Patrick Henry University and became friends with John Galt and Francisco dAnconia while studying under Hugh Akston and Robert Stadler. Danneskjld seizes relief ships that are being sent from the States to The Peoples States of Europe. As the novel progresses, Danneskjld begins to become active in American waters. Danneskjlds action is to restore to other creative people the money, in gold, which was unjustly taken away from themspecifically, their tax payments.  He explains this is not altruism; his motivation is to ensure that once those espousing Galts philosophy are restored to their rightful place in society, they will have enough capital to rebuild the world.Kept in the background for much of the book, Danneskjld makes a personal appearance when he risks his life to meet Hank Rearden in the night and hand him a bar of gold as an advance payment to encourage Rearden to persevere in his increasingly difficult situation. Danneskjld is married to the actress Kay Ludlow; their relationship is kept hidden from the outside world, which only knows of Ludlow as a star who retired and dropped out of sight. It is mentioned that some of the strikers have strong reservations about his way of conducting the common struggle.According to Branden, who was closely associated with Rand at the time the book was written, there were sections written describing Danneskjlds adventures at sea, which were cut from the final published text.(Reedstrom, Karen. 1992 Interview with Full Context. Barbara Branden interview in Full Context, October 1992. Republished on barbarabranden.com. Retrieved 1 June 2007.) In the published book, Danneskjld is always seen through the eyes of others (Dagny Taggart or Hank Rearden), except for a brief paragraph in the very last chapter.AntagonistsJames TaggartThe President of Taggart Transcontinental and the books most important antagonist. Taggart is an expert influence peddler who is, however, incapable of making operational decisions on his own. He relies on his sister, Dagny Taggart, to actually run the railroad, but nonetheless opposes her in almost every endeavor. In a sense, he is the antithesis of Dagny.As the novel progresses, the moral philosophy of the looters is revealed: it is a code of stagnation. The goal of this code is to not exist, to not move forward, to become a zero. Taggart struggles to remain unaware that this is his goal. He maintains his pretense that he wants to live, and becomes horrified whenever his mind starts to grasp the truth about himself. This contradiction leads to the recurring absurdity of his life: the desire to destroy those on whom his life depends, and the horror that he will succeed at this. In the final chapters of the novel, he suffers a complete mental breakdown upon realizing that he can no longer deceive himself in this respect.Lillian ReardenThe unsupportive wife of Hank Rearden. They have been married eight years as the novel begins. Lillian is a frigid moocher who seeks to destroy her husband. She compares being Reardens wife with owning the worlds most powerful horse. Since she cannot comfortably ride a horse that goes too fast, she must bridle it down to her level, even if that means it will never reach its full potential and its power will be grievously wasted. Lillian tolerates sex with her husband only because she is realistic enough to know he is just a brute who requires satisfaction of his brute instincts. She indicates that she abhors Francisco dAnconia, because she believes he is a sexual adventurer.As her motives become more clear, Lillian is found to share the sentiments of many other moochers and their worship of destruction. Her actions are explained as the desire to destroy achievement in the false belief that such an act bestows a greatness to the destroyer equal to the accomplishment destroyed. She seeks, then, to ruin Rearden in an effort to prove her own value.Lillian achieves her goal to destroy Reardens business, when she passes on information to James Taggart about her husbands affair. This information is used to persuade Rearden to sign the Gift Certificate (which delivers all the property rights of Rearden Metal to the looters) and thereby destroys his business. Lillian discovers that she can accomplish her goal to destroy the business but she can neither achieve the greatness she desires nor her goal to destroy Hanks character. She uses James Taggart for sex as victory and revenge against Hank and Dagny. This does give her the satisfaction she desires and she continues to manipulate Hank until he is finally leaves her and joins Galts strikers.Dr. Floyd FerrisFerris is a biologist who works as co-ordinator at the State Science Institute. He uses his position there to deride reason and productive achievement, and publishes a book entitled Why Do You Think You Think? He clashes on several occasions with Hank Rearden, and twice attempts to blackmail Rearden into giving up Rearden Metal. He is also one of the group of looters who tries to get Rearden to agree to the Steel Unification Plan. Ferris hosts the demonstration of the Project X weapon, and is the creator of the Ferris Persuader, a torture machine. When John Galt is captured by the looters, Ferris uses the device on Galt, but it breaks down before extracting the information Ferris wants from Galt. Ferris represents the group which uses brute force on the heroes to achieve the ends of the looters.Dr. Robert StadlerA former professor at Patrick Henry University, mentor to Francisco dAnconia, John Galt and Ragnar Danneskjld. He has since become a sell-out, one who had great promise but squandered it for social approval, to the detriment of the free. He works at the State Science Institute where all his inventions are perverted for use by the military, including the instrument of his demise: Project X (Xylophone). The character was, in part, modeled on Robert Oppenheimer, whom Rand had interviewed for an earlier project, and his part in the creation of weapons.(David Harriman, of Ayn Rand, pp. 311-344, esp. 330-331.) To his former student Galt, Stadler represents the epitome of human evil, as the man who knew better but chose not to act for the good.Wesley MouchThe incompetent and treacherous lobbyist  whom Hank Rearden reluctantly employs in Washington. Later in the novel, he becomes the countrys economic dictator.Secondary charactersThe following secondary characters also appear in the novel.(Secondary characters are listed if they appear in character lists from any of the works used to establish the list of major characters above, but do not meet the criteria for major. Minor characters who are not listed in secondary works are not listed here.)*Hugh Akston is identified as One of the last great advocates of reason. He was a renowned philosopher and the head of the Department of Philosophy at Patrick Henry University, where he taught Francisco dAnconia, John Galt, and Ragnar Danneskjld. He was, along with Robert Stadler, a father figure to these three. Akstons name is so hallowed that a young lady, on hearing that Francisco had studied under him, is shocked. She thought he must have been one of those great names from an earlier century. He now works as a cook in a roadside diner, and proves extremely skillful at that. When Dagny tracks him down, and before she discovers his true identity, he rejects her enthusiastic offer to manage the dining car services for Taggart Transcontinental.*Jeff Allen is a tramp who stows away on a Taggart train during one of Dagnys cross-country trips. Instead of throwing him out, she allows him to ride as her guest. It is from Allen that she learns the full story behind the collapse of the Twentieth Century Motor Company (Rands extensive metaphor for the inherent flaws of communism), as well as a hint of John Galts true background.*Calvin Atwood is owner of Atwood Light and Power Company and joins Galts strike.*Cherryl Brooks is a dime store shopgirl who marries James Taggart after a chance encounter in her store the night the John Galt Line was falsely deemed his greatest success.  She marries him thinking he is the heroic person behind Taggart Transcontinental. Cherryl is at first harsh towards Dagny, having believed Jim Taggarts descriptions of his sister, until she questions employees of the railroad. Upon learning that her scorn had been misdirected, Cherryl puts off apologizing to Dagny out of shame until the night before she commits suicide, when she confesses to Dagny that when she married Jim, she thought he had the heroic qualities that she had looked up to - she thought she was marrying someone like Dagny. Upon realizing the nature of the moral code surrounding her, the apparent lack of escape for herself and the heroes she worships, and her unnamed desire to remove support from the machinations she abhors, Cherryl throws herself from a bridge to her death after witnessing her husband James Taggart sleeping with Lillian Rearden and after being beaten for showing James his code of death.*Mayor Bascom is the mayor of Rome, Wisconsin, who reveals part of the history of the Twentieth Century Motor Company.*Bill Brent is the chief dispatcher for the Colorado Division of Taggart Transcontinental, who tries to prevent the Taggart Tunnel disaster.*Dr. Blodgett is the scientist who pulls the lever to demonstrate Project X.*Orren Boyle is the head of Associated Steel antithesis of Hank Rearden and a friend of James Taggart. He is an investor in the San Sebastin Mines.*Laura Bradford is an actress and Kip Chalmerss mistress.*Kip Chalmers is a Washington man who has decided to run for election as Legislator from California. On the way to his campaign, the Taggart Transcontinental train that is carrying him encounters a split rail, resulting in the destruction of its diesel engine. His demands lead to a coal-burning steam engine being attached to his train in its stead and used to pull it through an eight-mile tunnel. The result is the suffocation of all passengers and the destruction of the Taggart Tunnel.*Emma Chalmers, Kip Chalmerss mother, gains some influence after his death. Known as Kips Ma, she starts a soybean-growing project in Louisiana and commandeers thousands of railcars to move the harvest. As a result, the years wheat crop from Minnesota never reaches the rest of the country, but instead rots in storage; also, the soybean crop is lost, having been reaped too early.*Dan Conway is the middle-aged president of the Phoenix-Durango railroad. Running a railroad is just about the only thing he knows. When the Anti-dog-eat-dog Rule is used to drive his business out of Colorado, he loses the will to fight, and resigns himself to a quiet life of books and fishing.*Ken Danagger owns Danagger Coal in Pennsylvania. He helps Hank Rearden illegally make Rearden Metal, then later decides to quit and join Galts strike moments before Dagny arrives to try to persuade him otherwise.*Quentin Daniels is an enterprising engineer hired by Dagny Taggart to reconstruct John Galts motor. Partway through this process, Quentin withdraws his effort for the same reasons John Galt himself had. Dagnys pursuit of Quentin leads her to Galts Gulch.*Sebastian dAnconia was the 16th (or 17th) Century founder of the dAnconia dynasty. Escaped from Spain because of expressing his opinions too freely and coming in conflict with the Inquisition, leaving behind a palace and his beloved. Started a small mine in South America, which became the beginning of a mining empire and a new fortune (and a new palace). Eventually sent for his beloved who had waited for him many years. He is the role model which Francisco dAnconia looks to, as Dagny Taggart looks to Nathaniel Taggart. Francisco remarks that their respective ancestors would have liked each other.*Balph Eubank is called the literary leader of the age, despite the fact that he has never sold more than three thousand copies of his books. He complains that it is disgraceful that artists are treated as peddlers, and that there should be a law limiting the sales of books to ten thousand copies.*The Fishwife is one of the strikers, who earns her living by providing the fish for Hammonds grocery market; she is described as having dark, disheveled hair and large eyes, and is a writer. Galt says she wouldnt be published outside. She believes that when one deals with words, one deals with the mind. According to Branden in her book Passion of Ayn Rand, The Fishwife is Ayns Hitchcock-like appearance in Atlas Shrugged.()*Lawrence Hammond runs Hammond Cars in Colorado, one of the few companies in existence that still produces top-quality vehicles. He eventually quits and joins the strike.*Richard Halley is Dagny Taggarts favorite composer, who mysteriously disappeared after the evening of his greatest triumph. Halley spent years as a struggling and unappreciated composer. At age 24, his opera Phaethon was performed for the first time, to an audience who booed and heckled it. After 19 years, Phaethon was performed again, but this time it was received to the greatest ovation the opera house had ever heard. The following day, Halley retired, sold the rights to his music, and disappeared.*Mrs. William Hastings is the widow of the chief engineer at the Twentieth Century Motor Company. Her husband quit shortly after Galt did and joined the strike some years later. Her lead allows Dagny to find Hugh Akston.*Dr. Thomas Hendricks is a famous brain surgeon who developed a new method of preventing strokes. He joined Galts strike when the American medical system was put under government control.*Tinky Holloway is one of the looters and is frequently referred to and quoted by other characters in the story, but he has only has one major appearance: during the Washington meeting with Hank Rearden.*Lee Hunsacker is in charge of a company called Amalgamated Service when takes over the Twentieth Century Motor Company. He files a lawsuit that eventually leads to Midas Mulligan and Judge Narragansett joining the strike.*Gwen Ives is Hank Reardens secretary.*Owen Kellogg is Assistant to the Manager of the Taggart Terminal in York. He catches Dagny Taggarts eye as one of the few competent men on staff. After seeing the sorry state of the Ohio Division, she decides to make him its new Superintendent. However, as soon as she returns to New York, Kellogg informs her that he is quitting his job. Owen Kellogg eventually reaches, and settles in, Galts Gulch.*Fred Kinnan is a labor leader and member of the looter cabal. Unlike the others, however, Kinnan is straightforward and honest about his purpose. Kinnan is the only one to openly state the true motivations of himself and his fellow conspirators. At the end of Galts 3 hour speech, he expresses admiration for the man, as he says what he means. Despite this, Kinnan admits that he is one of the people Galt is out to destroy.*Paul Larkin is an unsuccessful, middle-aged businessman, a friend of the Rearden family. He meets with the other Looters to work out a plan to bring Rearden down. James Taggart knows he is friends with Hank Rearden and challenges his loyalty, and Larkin assures Taggart that he will go along with them.*Eugene Lawson heads the Community Bank of Madison, then gets a job with the government when it goes bankrupt.*Mort Liddy is a hack composer who writes trite scores for movies and modern symphonies to which no one listens. He believes melody is a primitive vulgarity. He is one of Lillian Reardens friends and a member of the cultural elite.*Clifton Locey is a friend of Jim Taggart who takes the position of vice-president of operation when Dagny Taggart quits.*Pat Logan is the engineer on the first run of the John Galt Line. He later strikes.*Kay Ludlow is a beautiful actress and the wife of Ragnar Danneskjld.*Dick McNamara is a contractor who finished the San Sebastian Line. Dagny Taggart plans to hire him to lay the new Rearden Metal track for the Rio Norte Line, but before she does so, he mysteriously disappears. She later discovers that he has joined the strike and settled in Galts Gulch.*Cuffy Meigs is the Director of Unification for the railroad business. He carries a pistol and a lucky rabbits foot, and he dresses in a military uniform, and has been described as impervious to thought. Meigs seizes control of Project X and accidentally destroys it, demolishing the countrys last railroad bridge across the Mississippi River and killing himself, his men, and Dr. Stadler.*Dave Mitchum is a state-hired superintendent of the Colorado Division of Taggart Transcontinental. He is partially responsible for the Taggart Tunnel disaster.*Chick Morrison holds the position of Morale Conditioner in the government.*Horace Bussby Mowen is the president of the Amalgamated Switch and Signal Company, Inc. of Connecticut. He is a businessman who sees nothing wrong with the moral code that is destroying society and would never dream of saying he is in business for any reason other than the good of society. Dagny Taggart hires Mowen to produce switches made of Rearden Metal. He is reluctant to build anything with this unproven technology, and has to be cajoled into accepting the contract. When pressured by public opinion, he discontinues production of the switches, forcing Dagny to find an alternative source.*Midas Mulligan is a wealthy banker who mysteriously disappeared in protest after he was given a court order to lend money to an incompetent applicant. When the order came down he liquidated his entire business, paid off his depositors, and joined Galts strike. Mulligans birth name was Michael, but he had it legally changed after a news article called him Midas in a derogatory fashion, which Mulligan took as a compliment.*Judge Narragansett is an American jurist who ruled in favor of Midas Mulligan during the case brought against him by the incompetent loan applicant. When Narragansetts ruling was reversed on appeal, he retired and joined the strike. At the end of the novel, he is seen editing the States Constitution, crossing out the contradicting amendments of it and adding an amendment to prohibit Congress from passing laws that restrain freedom of trade.*Ben Nealy is a railroad contractor whom Dagny Taggart hires to replace the track on the Rio Norte Line with Rearden Metal. Nealy is incompetent, but Dagny can find no one better in all the country. Nealy believes that anything can get done with enough muscle power. He sees no role for intelligence in human achievement. He relies on Dagny and Ellis Wyatt to run things, and resents them for doing it, because it appears to him like they are just bossing people around.*Betty Pope is a wealthy socialite who is having a meaningless sexual affair with James Taggart. She is deliberately crude in a way that casts ridicule on her high social position.*Dr. Potter holds some undefined position with the State Science Institute. He is sent to try to obtain the rights to Rearden Metal.*Dr. Simon Pritchett is the prestigious head of the Department of Philosophy at Patrick Henry University and is considered the leading philosopher of the age. He believes that man is nothing but a collection of chemicals, reason is a superstition, it is futile to seek meaning in life, and the duty of a philosopher is to show that nothing can be understood.*Reardens mother, whose name is not mentioned, lives with Rearden at his home in Philadelphia. She is involved in charity work, and berates Rearden whenever she can. She dotes on her weak son Philip Rearden.*Philip Rearden is the younger brother of Hank Rearden. He lives in his brothers home in Philadelphia and is completely dependent on him. He is resentful of his brothers charity.*Dwight Sanders owns Sanders Aircraft, a producer of high-quality airplanes, and joins the strike.*Bertram Scudder is an editorial writer for the magazine The Future. He typically bashes business and businessmen, but he never says anything specific in his articles, relying on innuendo, sneers, and denunciation. He wrote a hatchet job on Hank Rearden called The Octopus. He is also vocal in support of the Equalization of Opportunity Bill.*Claude Slagenhop is president of political organization Friends of Global Progress and one of Lillian Reardens friends. He believes that ideas are just air, that this is no time for talk, but for action. Global Progress is a sponsor of the Equalization of Opportunity Bill.*Gerald and Ivy Starnes are the two surviving children of Jed Starnes; together with their since-deceased brother Eric, they instituted a communistic payment-and-benefits program at Twentieth Century Motors which drove the company into bankruptcy. Gerald, a dying alcoholic, and Ivy, a pseudo-Buddhist ascetic, continue to insist that the plan was perfect and that the failure of their fathers company was entirely due to the workers.*Andrew Stockton runs the Stockton Foundry in Stockton, Colorado. When he joins the strike, he opens a foundry in Galts Gulch.*Nathaniel Taggart was the founder of Taggart Transcontinental. He built his railroad without any government handouts, and ran the business for no other reason than to turn a profit. He began as a penniless adventurer and ended up as one of the wealthiest men in the country. He never earned money by force or fraud, and never apologized for becoming wealthy and successful. He was one of the most hated men of his time. Dagny is often inspired by looking at a statue of Nat Taggart at the railroad headquarters.*Mr. Thompson is the Head of the State for the States. He is not particularly intelligent and has a very undistinguished look. He knows politics, however, and is a master of public relations and back-room deals. Rands notes indicate that she modeled him on President S. Truman, and that she deliberately decided not to call him of the United States as this title has honorable connotations which the character does not deserve.*Lester Tuck is the press agent for Kip Chalmers.*Clem Weatherby is a government representative on the board of directors of Taggart Transcontinental. Dagny considers him the least bad of the government representatives, since he does have some real knowledge on the running of trains. She notices, however, that he is the least appreciated by his own bosses.*The Wet Nurse (Tony) is a young bureaucrat sent by the government to watch over Reardens mills. Though he starts out as a cynical follower of the looters code, his experience at the mills transforms him, and he comes to respect and admire the producers. He is shot attempting to inform Hank Rearden about a government plot, but does succeed in warning Rearden just before he dies.*Edwin Eddie Willers is the Special Assistant to the Vice-President in Charge of Operations at Taggart Transcontinental. He grew up with Dagny Taggart. His father and grandfather worked for the Taggarts, and he followed in their footsteps. He is completely loyal to Dagny and to Taggart Transcontinental. He is also secretly in love with Dagny. Willers is generally assumed to represent the common man: someone who does not possess the Promethean creative ability of The Strikers, but matches them in moral courage and is capable of appreciating and making use of their creations. He sticks it out with the railway to the bitter end, even when the old world is obviously collapsing and Dagny has shifted her attention and loyalty to saving the captive Galt. In the end, he stays with the broken-down Comet in the middle of the desert, like a captain going down with his ship. It is unclear whether or not the strikers or anyone else will return to save him.*Ellis Wyatt is the head of Wyatt Oil. He has almost single-handedly revived the economy of Colorado by discovering a new process for extracting more oil from what were thought to be exhausted oil wells. When first introduced, he is aggressive towards Dagny, whom he does not yet know and whom he blames for what are, in fact, her brothers policies which directly threaten his business. When the government passes laws and decrees which make it impossible for him to continue, he sets all his oil wells on fire, leaving a jeering note: I am leaving it as I found it. Take over. Its yours. One particular burning well that resists all efforts to extinguish it becomes known as Wyatts Torch. Later Dagny meets him in Galts Gulch.NotesReferences****des personnages de La Grve
624
Alaska
 Website                www.alaska.govAlaska  is the largest state in the United States by area. It is situated in the northwest extremity of the North American continent, with Canada to the east, the Arctic Ocean to the north, and the Pacific Ocean to the west and south, with Russia further west across the Strait. Approximately half of Alaskas 710,231 residents (as per the United States Census) live within the metropolitan area. Alaska is the least densely populated state of the U.S.()Alaska was purchased from the Empire on March 30, 1867, for $7.2 million ($ in todays dollars) at about two cents per acre ($4.74/km). The land went through several administrative changes before becoming an organized (or incorporated) territory on May 11, 1912, and the 49th state of the U.S. on January 3, 1959.The name Alaska () was already introduced in the Russian colonial period, when it was used only for the peninsula and is derived from the Aleut alaxsxaq, meaning the mainland or more literally, the object towards which the action of the sea is directed.(Ransom, J. Ellis. 1940. Derivation of the Word Alaska. American Anthropologist n.s., 42: pp. 550551) It is also known as Alyeska, the great land, an Aleut word derived from the same root.GeographyAlaska has a longer coastline than all the other U.S. states combined.() It is the only non-contiguous U.S. state on continental North America; about  of British Columbia (Canada) separate Alaska from Washington state. Alaska is thus an exclave of the United States. It is technically part of the continental U.S., but is often not included in colloquial use; Alaska is not part of the contiguous U.S., often called the Lower 48.(The other three exclaves of the United States are the Angle of Minnesota, Roberts, Washington and Vermont.)  The capital city, Juneau, is situated on the mainland of the North American continent, but is not connected by road to the rest of the North American highway system.The state is bordered by the Territory and Columbia in Canada, to the east, the of Alaska and the Pacific Ocean to the south, the Sea, Strait, and Sea to the west and the Arctic Ocean to the north. Alaskas territorial waters touch Russias territorial waters in the Bering Strait, as the Russian Diomede Island and Alaskan Diomede Island are only  apart.  With the extension of the Islands into the eastern hemisphere, it is technically both the westernmost and easternmost state in the United States, as well as also being the northernmost.area compared to conterminous US.svg|thumb|Alaskas size compared with the 48 contiguous states.Alaska is the largest state in the United States in land area at , over twice the size of Texas, the next largest state. Alaska is larger than all but 18 sovereign countries.Counting territorial waters, Alaska is larger than the combined area of the next three largest states: Texas, California, and Montana. It is also larger than the combined area of the 22 smallest U.S. states.RegionsThere are no officially defined borders demarcating the various regions of Alaska, but there are six generally accepted regions:South CentralThe most populous region of Alaska, containing Anchorage, the Valley and the Peninsula.  Rural, mostly unpopulated areas south of the Range and west of the Mountains also fall within the definition of Southcentral, as well as the William Sound area and the communities of Cordova and Valdez.SoutheastAlso known as the Panhandle, this is the region of Alaska closest to the rest of the United States, and hence was where most initial non-Native settlement occurred following the Purchase. It contains the state capital, Juneau, the former capital, Sitka, and the large town of Ketchikan.  The road systems leading from these cities are strictly local;  no roads connect these communities to each other or any other communities apart from their own suburbs.  The region is dominated by the Archipelago as well as the National Forest, the largest national forest in the United States.InteriorFile:Denali Mt McKinley.jpg|thumb|right|McKinley is both the highest peak in Alaska and in all of North America.The largest region of Alaska, much of it uninhabited wilderness.  Fairbanks is the only community of any significant size.  Small towns and Native villages are scattered throughout, mostly along the highway and river systems.  National Park and Preserve is located here, home to McKinley (also widely known by its local name of Denali), the highest point in North America.SouthwestFile:Grizzly Bear Fishing Brooks Falls.jpg|thumb|upright|bear fishing for salmon at Brooks Falls.A sparsely inhabited region stretching some  inland from the Bering Sea. Most of the population lives along the coast. Island is also located in Southwest. The massive Delta, one of the largest river deltas in the world, is here.  Portions of the Peninsula are considered part of Southwest, with the remaining portions included with the Aleutian Islands (see below).North SlopeThe North Slope is mostly tundra peppered with small villages. The area is known for its massive reserves of crude oil, and contains both the Petroleum ReserveAlaska and the Bay Oil Field.() Barrow, the northernmost city in the United States, is located here.  The Northwest Arctic area, anchored by Kotzebue and also containing the River valley, is often regarded as being part of this region.  However, the respective Inupiat of the North Slope and of the Northwest Arctic seldom think of themselves as one.Aleutian IslandsMore than 300 small, volcanic islands make up this chain, which stretches over  into the Pacific Ocean. The Date Line was drawn west of 180 to keep the whole state, and thus the entire North American continent, within the same legal day.  However, because some of these islands fall in the Eastern Hemisphere, this makes Alaska the northernmost, easternmost and westernmost state in the union, with the southernmost state being Hawaii.  Two of the islands, Attu and Kiska, were occupied by Japanese forces during World War II.Natural featuresFile:Augustine Volcano Jan 12 2006 edited-1.jpg|right|thumb|Volcano erupting on January 12, 2006.With its myriad islands, Alaska has nearly  of tidal shoreline. The Islands chain extends west from the southern tip of the Peninsula. Many active volcanoes are found in the Aleutians and in coastal regions. Island, for example, is home to Shishaldin, which is an occasionally smoldering volcano that rises to  above the North Pacific. It is the most perfect volcanic cone on Earth, even more symmetrical than Japans Fuji. The chain of volcanoes extends to Spurr, west of Anchorage on the mainland. Geologists have identified Alaska as part of Wrangellia, a large region consisting of multiple states and Canadian provinces in the Northwest which is actively undergoing continent building.One of the worlds largest tides occurs in Arm, just south of Anchorage  tidal differences can be more than . (Many sources say Turnagain has the second-greatest tides in North America, but several areas in Canada have larger tides.)()Alaska has more than three million lakes.()() Marshlands and wetland permafrost cover  (mostly in northern, western and southwest flatlands). Glacier ice covers some  of land and  of tidal zone. The Glacier complex near the southeastern border with Yukon covers  alone. With over 100,000, Alaska has half of the worlds glaciers.Land ownershipAccording to an October 1998 report by the States Bureau of Land Management, approximately 65% of Alaska is owned and managed by the U.S. federal government as public lands, including a multitude of national forests, national parks, and wildlife refuges. Of these, the of Land Management manages  , or 23.8% of the state. The National Wildlife Refuge is managed by the States Fish and Wildlife Service. It is the worlds largest wildlife refuge, comprising .Of the remaining land area, the state of Alaska owns ;  its entitlement under the Statehood Act.  A portion of that acreage is occasionally ceded to organized boroughs, under the statutory provisions pertaining to newly-formed boroughs.  Smaller portions are set aside for rural subdivisions and other homesteading-related opportunities, though these are infrequently popular due to the often remote and roadless locations.  The of Alaska, as a grant university, also owns substantial acreage which it manages independently.Another  are owned by 12 regional, and scores of local, Native corporations created under the Native Claims Settlement Act.  Regional Native corporation Limited often promotes itself as the largest private landowner in Alaska in advertisements and other communications.  Provisions of ANCSA allowing the corporations land holdings to be sold on the open market starting in 1991 were repealed before they could take effect.  Effectively, the corporations hold title (including subsurface title in many cases, a privilege denied to individual Alaskans) but cannot sell the land.  Individual Native allotments can be and are sold on the open market, however.Various private interests own the remaining land, totaling about one percent of the state.  Alaska is, by a large margin, the state with the smallest percentage of private land ownership when Native corporation holdings are excluded.ClimateThe climate in Juneau and the southeast panhandle is a mid-latitude climate (climate classification Cfb) in the southern sections and a subarctic oceanic climate (Kppen Cfc) in the northern parts. On an annual basis, the panhandle is both the wettest and warmest part of Alaska with milder temperatures in the winter and high precipitation throughout the year. Juneau averages over  of precipitation a year, while other areas receive over .(Mean Annual Precipitation in Alaska-Yukon. Oregon Climate Service at State University. Retrieved October 23, 2006. ) This is also the only region in Alaska in which the average daytime high temperature is above freezing during the winter months.The climate of Anchorage and south central Alaska is mild by Alaskan standards due to the regions proximity to the seacoast. While the area gets less rain than southeast Alaska, it gets more snow, and days tend to be clearer. On average, Anchorage receives  of precipitation a year, with around  of snow, although there are areas in the south central which receive far more snow. It is a subarctic climate (Kppen Dfc) due to its brief, cool summers.beach.jpg|thumb|Barrow, known colloquially for many years by the nickname Top of the World, is the northernmost city in the United States.The climate of Western Alaska is determined in large part by the Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska. It is a subarctic oceanic climate in the southwest and a continental subarctic climate farther north. The temperature is somewhat moderate considering how far north the area is. This region has a tremendous amount of variety in precipitation.  An area stretching from the northern side of the Seward Peninsula to the River valley is technically a desert, with portions receiving less than  of precipitation annually.  On the other extreme, some locations between Dillingham and Bethel average around  of precipitation.(The climate of the interior of Alaska is subarctic. Some of the highest and lowest temperatures in Alaska occur around the area near Fairbanks. The summers may have temperatures reaching into the 90sF (the low to mid 30s C), while in the winter, the temperature can fall below . Precipitation is sparse in the Interior, often less than  a year, but what precipitation falls in the winter tends to stay the entire winter.The highest and lowest recorded temperatures in Alaska are both in the Interior. The highest is  in Fort Yukon (which is just  inside the arctic circle) on June 27, 1915,()() making Alaska tied with Hawaii as the state with the lowest high temperature in the United States.()() The lowest official Alaska temperature is  in Prospect Creek on January 23, 1971,(( one degree above the lowest temperature recorded in continental North America (in Snag, Yukon, Canada).()The climate in the extreme north of Alaska is Arctic (Kppen ET) with long, very cold winters and short, cool summers. Even in July, the average low temperature in Barrow is .(History for Barrow, Alaska. Monthly Summary for July 2006. Weather Underground. Retrieved October 23, 2006.) Precipitation is light in this part of Alaska, with many places averaging less than  per year, mostly as snow which stays on the ground almost the entire year.HistoryAlaska nativesNumerous indigenous peoples occupied Alaska for thousands of years before the arrival of European peoples to the area. The Tlingit people developed a matriarchal society in what is today Southeast Alaska, along with parts of British Columbia and the Yukon. Also in Southeast were the Haida, now well known for their unique arts, and the Tsimshian people, whose population were decimated by a smallpox epidemic in the 1860s. The Aleutian Islands are still home to the Aleut peoples seafaring society, although they were among the first to be exploited by the Russians. Western and Southwestern Alaska are home to the Yupik, while their cousins the Alutiiq lived in what is now Southcentral Alaska. The Gwichin people of the northern Interior region are primarily known today for their dependence on the caribou within the much-contested National Wildlife Refuge. The North Slope and Diomede Island are occupied by the widespread Inuit people.ColonizationFile:Miners climb Chilkoot.jpg|thumb|Miners and prospectors climb the Trail during the Gold Rush.Some researchers believe that the first Russian settlement in Alaska was established in century.( . .      XVII .? . ., 1992.  4. .6769.) According to this hypothesis, in 1648 several koches of Dezhnyovs expedition were thrown to Alaska by storm and founded this settlement. This hypothesis is based on the message of Chukchi geographer Daurkin who had visited Alaska in 17641765 and reported about village on the Kheuveren river, populated by bearded men who pray to the icons. Some modern researchers associate Kheuveren with River.(http://www.fartuna.ru/go.php?ad489047)It is usually assumed that the first European boat to reach Alaska was St. Gabriel under the authority of the surveyor M. S. Gvozdev and assistant navigator I. Fyodorov on August 21, 1732 during expedition of Siberian cossak A. F. Shestakov adb Belorussian explorer D. I. Pavlutsky (17291735)( . .   . //     : - .  . 3.  2000.  .   . .-.: , 1993.)Another European contact with Alaska occurred in 1741, when Bering led an expedition for the Russian Navy aboard the St. Peter. After his crew returned to Russia with sea otter pelts judged to be the finest fur in the world, small associations of fur traders began to sail from the shores of Siberia towards the Aleutian islands. The first permanent European settlement was founded in 1784. Between 1774 and 1800 Spain sent several expeditions to Alaska in order to assert its claim over the Pacific Northwest. In 1789 a Spanish settlement and fort were built in Sound. These expeditions gave names to places such as Valdez, Sound, and Cordova. Later, the Company carried out an expanded colonization program during the early-to-mid-19th century.Sitka, renamed Archangel from 1804 to 1867, on Island in the Archipelago in what is now Alaska, became the capital of America and remained the capital after the colony was transferred to the United States. The Russians never fully colonized Alaska, and the colony was never very profitable.H. Seward, the States Secretary of State, negotiated the Purchase (also known as Sewards Folly) with the Russians in 1867 for $7.2 million. Alaska was loosely governed by the military initially, and was administered as a district starting in 1884, with a governor appointed by the president of the United States, as well as a district court headquartered in Sitka.For most of Alaskas first decade under the American flag, Sitka was the only community inhabited by American settlers.  They organized a provisional city government, which was Alaskas first city government, but not in a legal sense.  Legislation allowing Alaskan communities to legally incorporate as cities did not come about until 1900, and home rule for cities was extremely limited or unavailable until statehood took effect.U.S. TerritoryStarting in the 1890s and stretching in some places to the early 1910s, gold rushes in Alaska and the nearby Yukon Territory brought thousands of miners and settlers to Alaska.  Alaska was officially incorporated as an organized territory in 1912.  Alaskas capital, which had been in Sitka until the 1900 legislation mandated its transfer to Juneau (the actual move took place in 1906, after initial questions arose), begun to take shape with the construction of the Governors Mansion that same year.File:AttuSnow.jpg|thumb|left|upright|U.S. troops negotiate snow and ice during the of Attu in May 1943.During World War II, the Islands Campaign focused on the three outer Aleutian Islands  Attu, Agattu and Kiska(these three Aleutian outer islands are about  away from continental USSR,  from continental Alaska (U.S.),  from Japan.)  that were invaded by Japanese troops and occupied between June 1942 and August 1943. Unalaska/Dutch Harbor became a significant base for the U.S. Army Air Corps and Navy submariners.The U.S. Lend-Lease program involved the flying of American warplanes through Canada to Fairbanks and thence Nome; Soviet pilots took possession of these aircraft, ferrying them to fight the German invasion of the Soviet Union. The construction of military bases contributed to the population growth of some Alaskan cities.StatehoodStatehood for Alaska was an important cause of Wickersham early in his tenure as a congressional delegate.  Decades later, the statehood movement gained its first real momentum following a territorial referendum in 1946.  The Alaska Statehood Committee and Alaskas Constitutional Convention would soon follow.  Statehood supporters also found themselves fighting major battles against political foes, mostly in the U.S. Congress but also within Alaska.  Statehood was approved by Congress on July 7, 1958. Alaska was officially proclaimed a state on January 3, 1959.On April 27, 1964, the massive Friday Earthquake killed 133 people and destroyed several villages and portions of large coastal communities, mainly by the resultant tsunamis and landslides. It was the third most powerful earthquake in the recorded history of the world, with a moment magnitude of 9.2. It was over one thousand times more powerful than the 1989 San Francisco earthquake.  The time of day (5:36 pm), time of year and location of the epicenter were all cited as factors in potentially sparing thousands of lives, particularly in Anchorage.The 1968 discovery of oil at Bay and the 1977 completion of the Pipeline led to an oil boom.  Royalty revenues from oil have funded large state budgets from 1980 onward.  That same year, not coincidentally, Alaska repealed its state income tax.  In 1989, the Valdez hit a reef in the William Sound, spilling over  of crude oil over 1,100 miles (1,600 km) of coastline. Today, the battle between philosophies of development and conservation is seen in the contentious debate over oil drilling in the National Wildlife Refuge.Demographicsfootnote  1930 and 1940 censuses taken in preceding autumnSources: 19102010()The States Census Bureau, as of July 1, 2008, estimated Alaskas population at 686,293,( which represents an increase of 59,361, or 9.5%, since the last census in 2000.() This includes a natural increase since the last census of 60,994 people (that is 86,062 births minus 25,068 deaths) and a decrease due to net migration of 5,469 people out of the state.( Immigration from outside the U.S. resulted in a net increase of 4,418 people, and migration within the country produced a net loss of 9,887 people.(In 2000 Alaska ranked the 48th state by population, ahead of Vermont and Wyoming (and Washington D.C.).() Alaska is the least densely populated state, and one of the most sparsely populated areas in the world, at 1.0 person per square mile (0.42/km), with the next state, Wyoming, at 5.1 per square mile (1.97/km). Alaska is the largest U.S. state by area, and the sixth wealthiest (per capita income).  As of January 2010, the states unemployment rate is 8.5%.(Bls.gov; Local Area Unemployment Statistics)Race and ancestryAccording to the U.S. Census, Alaska had a population of 710,231. In terms of race and ethnicity, the state was 66.7% White (64.7% Non-Hispanic White Alone), 14.8% American Indian and Alaska Native, 5.4% Asian, 3.3% Black or African American, 1.0% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander, 1.6% from Some Other Race, and 7.3% from Two or More Races. Hispanics or Latinos of any race made up 5.5% of the population.()LanguagesAccording to the 20052007 American Community Survey, 84.7% of people over the age of five speak only English at home. About 3.5% speak Spanish at home. About 2.2% speak another Indo-European language at home and about 4.3% speak an Asian language at home. And about 5.3% speak other languages at home.()A total of 5.2% of Alaskans speak one of the states 22 indigenous languages, known locally as native languages. These languages belong to two major language families: EskimoAleut and Na-Dene. As the homeland of these two major language families of North America, Alaska has been described as the crossroads of the continent, providing evidence for the recent settlement of North America by way of the land bridge.ReligionOrthodox Church.jpg|thumb|right|St. Michaels Russian Orthodox Cathedral in Sitka.Alaska has been identified, along with Pacific Northwest states Washington and Oregon, as being the least religious in the U.S.()(Believe it or not, Alaskas one of nations least religious states Anchorage Daily News, 2008 July 13. )  According to statistics collected by the Association of Religion Data Archives, about 39% of Alaska residents were members of religious congregations. Protestants had 78,070 members, Roman Catholics had 54,359, and mainline Protestants had 37,156.()  After Catholicism, the largest single denominations are Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints with 30,169,() and Southern Baptists with 22,959.  The large Orthodox (with 49 parishes and up to 50,000 followers)() population is a result of early Russian colonization and missionary work among Alaska Natives.()In 1795, the First Orthodox Church was established in Kodiak. Intermarriage with Alaskan Natives helped the Russian immigrants integrate into society. As a result, an increasing number of Russian Orthodox churches() gradually became established within Alaska. Alaska also has the largest Quaker population (by percentage) of any state.() In 2009 there were 6,000 Jews in Alaska (for whom observance of the mitzvah may pose special problems).(http://www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2011/tables/11s0077.pdf) Estimates for the number of Alaskan Muslims range from 2,000(First Muslim cemetery opens in Alaska )(Engaging Muslim: Religion, Culture, Politics ) to 5,000.() In 2010, the local Muslim community broke ground on the first mosque in the state.() Alaskan Hindus often share venues and celebrations with members of other religious communities including Sikhs and Jains.(Shri Ganesha Mandir of Alaska )()(Holi & Baisakhi celebrated by Alaskan Hindus and Sikhs )EconomyFile:Alaska Pipeline Closeup Underneath.jpg|thumb|upright|The Pipeline transports oil, Alaskas most financially important export, from the North Slope to Valdez. Pertinent are the pipes in the column mounts, which disperses heat upwards and prevents melting of permafrost.The 2007 state product was $44.9 billion, 45th in the nation. Its per capita personal income for 2007 was $40,042, ranking 15th in the nation. The oil and gas industry dominates the Alaskan economy, with more than 80% of the states revenues derived from petroleum extraction. Alaskas main export product (excluding oil and natural gas) is seafood, primarily salmon, cod, Pollock and crab.Agriculture represents only a fraction of the Alaskan economy. Agricultural production is primarily for consumption within the state and includes nursery stock, dairy products, vegetables, and livestock. Manufacturing is limited, with most foodstuffs and general goods imported from elsewhere.Employment is primarily in government and industries such as natural resource extraction, shipping, and transportation. Military bases are a significant component of the economy in both Fairbanks and Anchorage. Federal subsidies are also an important part of the economy, allowing the state to keep taxes low. Its industrial outputs are crude petroleum, natural gas, coal, gold, precious metals, zinc and other mining, seafood processing, timber and wood products. There is also a growing service and tourism sector. Tourists have contributed to the economy by supporting local lodging.EnergyAlaska has vast energy resources. Major oil and gas reserves are found in the North Slope (ANS) and Cook Inlet basins. According to the Information Administration, Alaska ranks second in the nation in crude oil production. Prudhoe Bay on Alaskas North Slope is the highest yielding oil field in the United States and on North America, typically producing about .The Pipeline can transport and pump up to  of crude oil per day, more than any other crude oil pipeline in the United States. Additionally, substantial coal deposits are found in Alaskas bituminous, sub-bituminous, and lignite coal basins.  The United States Geological Survey estimates that there are  of undiscovered, technically recoverable gas from natural gas hydrates on the Alaskan North Slope.()  Alaska also offers some of the highest hydroelectric power potential in the country from its numerous rivers. Large swaths of the Alaskan coastline offer wind and geothermal energy potential as well.()Alaskas economy depends heavily on increasingly expensive diesel fuel for heating, transportation, electric power and light. Though wind and hydroelectric power are abundant and underdeveloped, proposals for state-wide energy systems (e.g. with special low-cost electric interties) were judged uneconomical (at the time of the report, 2001) due to low ( Arctic Ocean|Northeast  Sea|East         |Southeast    |South      Pacific Ocean  |Southwest  Sea  Pacific Ocean  |West         Strait  Chukotka|Northwest  Sea}}list af:Alaskaang:Alaskaar:an:Alaskaarc:frp:Alaskaast:Alaskagn:Alaskaaz:Alyaskabn:zh-min-nan:Alaska()bh:bcl:Alaskabi:Alaskabs:Alaskabr:Alaskabg:ca:Alaskacv:ceb:Alaskacs:Aljakaco:Alaskacy:Alaskada:Alaskade:AlaskaDine Bikyah Hahoodzodsb:Alaskaet:Alaskael:es:Alaskaeo:Alaskoeu:Alaskafa:hif:Alaskafo:Alaskafr:Alaskafy:Alaskaga:Alascagv:Alaskagag:Alaskagd:Alasca- Alaskahak:-l-s-kxal:haw:laka()hi:hr:Aljaskaio:Alaskaig:lskilo:Alaskabpy:id:Alaskaia:Alaskaiu:/alaasikaik:Alaskaos:is:Alaskait:Alaskahe:jv:Alaskakn:pam:Alaska()ks:kw:Alaskasw:Alaskaht:Alaskaku:Alaskalad:Alaskala:Alascalv:Aaskalt:Aliaskalij:Alaskali:Alaskalmo:Alaskahu:Alaszkamk:mg:Alaskaml:mi:Alaskamr:arz:ms:Alaskamn:my:nah:Alaskamrj:nl:Alaska(stoat)new:ja:frr:Alaskano:Alaskann:Alaskaoc:Alaskauz:Alaskapnb:pap:Alaskapms:Alascands:Alaskapl:Alaskapt:Alascaro:Alaskarm:Alascasuyuru:sah:se:Alaskasa:sco:Alaskastq:Alaskasq:Alaskascn:Alaskasimple:Alaskask:Aljakasl:Aljaskackb:sr:sh:Aljaskafi:Alaskasv:Alaskatl:Alaskata:tt:te:th:tg:tr:Alaskaudm:uk:ur:Shitativec:Aascavi:Alaskavo:Alaskavls:Alaskawar:Alaskawuu:yi:yo:Alaskazh-yue:diq:Alaskabat-smg:Aliaskazh:
657
Asphalt
File:Bitumen.jpg|thumb|Natural bitumen from the seaImage:University of Queensland Pitch drop experiment-6-2.jpg|thumb|100px|The University of Queensland drop experiment, demonstrating the viscosity of bitumen.Asphalt  also known as bitumen is a sticky, black and highly viscous liquid or semi-solid that is present in most crude petroleums and in some natural deposits, it is a substance classed as a pitch. Until the 20th century, the term asphaltum was also used.( Full text at Internet Archive (archive.org))The primary use of asphalt is in road construction, where it is used as the glue or binder mixed with aggregate particles to create concrete. Its other main uses are for waterproofing products, including production of felt and for sealing flat roofs.The terms asphalt and bitumen are often used interchangeably to mean both natural and manufactured forms of the substance. In English, asphalt (or asphalt cement) is the carefully refined residue from the distillation process of selected crude oils. Outside the U.S., the product is often called bitumen. Natural deposits terminology also sometimes uses the word bitumen, such as at the Brea Tar Pits.Naturally occurring asphalt is sometimes specified by the term crude Bitumen; its viscosity is similar to that of cold molasses.()() whilst the material obtained from the distillation of oil (boiling at ) is sometimes referred to as refined bitumen.EtymologyThe word asphalt is derived from the late Middle English, in turn from French asphalte, based on Latin asphalton, asphaltum, which is the latinisation of the Greek  (sphaltos, sphalton), a word meaning asphalt/bitumen/pitch which some derive from - without and , (sfall), to make fall.() Note that in French, the term asphalte is used for naturally occurring bitumen-soaked limestone deposits, and for specialised manufactured products with fewer voids or greater bitumen content than the asphaltic concrete used to pave roads.Another description has it that the term derives from the Accadian term asphaltu or sphallo, meaning to split. It was later adopted from the Homeric Greeks as a verb meaning to make firm or stable, to secure. It is a significant fact that the first use of asphalt by the ancients was in the nature of a cement for securing or joining together various objects, and it thus seems likely that the name itself was expressive of this application. From the Greek, the word passed into late Latin, and thence into French (asphalte) and English (asphaltum and asphalt).The expression bitumen originated in the Sanskrit, where we find the words jatu, meaning pitch, and jatu-krit, meaning pitch creating, pitch producing (referring to coniferous or resinous trees). The Latin equivalent is claimed by some to be originally gwitu-men (pertaining to pitch), and by others, pixtumens (exuding or bubbling pitch), which was subsequently shortened to bitumen, thence passing via French into English. From the same root is derived the Anglo Saxon word cwidu (Mastix), the German word Kitt (cement or mastic) and the old Norse word kvada.(Abraham, Herbert (1938), p.1)Neither of the terms Asphalt or Bitumen should be confused with tar or tars. Modern usage Bitumina3.jpg|thumb|A tanker with the name Bitumina.In English, the word asphalt is used to refer to a mixture of mineral aggregate and bitumen (or tarmac in common parlance). The earlier word asphaltum is now archaic and not commonly used. In English, asphalt is equivalent to the British bitumen. However, asphalt is also commonly used as a shortened form of concrete (therefore equivalent to the British asphalt or tarmac). In English, bitumen is sometimes used as the generic term for road surfaces. In English, the word bitumen is used to refer to the vast Canadian deposits of extremely heavy oil,() while asphalt is used for the refinery product used to pave roads and manufacture shingles and various waterproofing products. Diluted bitumen (diluted with naphtha to make it flow in pipelines) is known as dilbit in the Canadian petroleum industry, while bitumen upgraded to crude oil is known as syncrude and syncrude blended with bitumen as synbit.()Bitumen is still the preferred geological term for naturally occurring deposits of the solid or semi-solid form of petroleum. Bituminous rock is a form of sandstone impregnated with bitumen. The sands of Canada are a similar material.Bitumen is sometimes incorrectly called tar (tar is a black viscous material obtained from the destructive distillation of coal and is chemically distinct from bitumen).ChemistryThe substance is completely soluble in disulfide, and composed primarily of a mixture of highly condensed aromatic hydrocarbons; it is most commonly modelled as a colloid, with asphaltenes as the dispersed phase and maltenes as the continuous phase (though there is some disagreement amongst chemists regarding its structure). One writer states that although a considerable amount of work has been done on the composition of asphalt, it is exceedingly difficult to separate individual hydrocarbon in pure form,() and it is almost impossible to separate and identify all the different molecules of asphalt, because the number of molecules with different chemical structure is extremely large.(Muhammad Abdul Quddus (1992), p.99, in ch.5 pdf)Most natural bitumens contain sulfur and several heavy metals such as nickel, vanadium, lead, chromium, mercury and also arsenic, selenium, and other toxic elements. Bitumens can provide good preservation of plants and animal fossils.BackgroundAsphalt or bitumen can sometimes be confused with tar, which is a similar black thermo-plastic material produced by the distillation of coal. During the early- and mid-20th century when gas was produced, tar was a readily available product and extensively used as the binder for road aggregates. The addition of tar to macadam roads led to the word tarmac, which is now used in common parlance to refer to road making materials. However, since the 1970s, when gas succeeded town gas, asphalt (bitumen) has completely overtaken the use of tar in these applications. Other examples of this confusion include the Brea Tar Pits and the Canadian Sands. Pitch is another term mistakenly used at times to refer to asphalt/bitumen, as in Lake.Natural deposits of asphalt include lake asphalts (primarily from the Lake in and Tobago and Bermudez in Venezuela), Gilsonite, the Sea, bituminous rock and Sands. Asphalt was mined at Ritchie Mines in Macfarlan in County, West Virginia in the United States from 1852 to 1873. Bituminous rock was mined at many locations in the United States for use as a paving material, primarily during the late 1800s.Asphalt can be separated from the other components in crude oil (such as naphtha, gasoline and diesel) by the process of distillation, usually under vacuum conditions. A better separation can be achieved by further processing of the heavier fractions of the crude oil in a unit, which uses either propane or butane in a supercritical phase to dissolve the lighter molecules which are then separated. Further processing is possible by blowing the product: namely reacting it with oxygen. This makes the product harder and more viscous.Asphalt is typically stored and transported at temperatures around 150 degrees Celsius (300 F).  Sometimes oil or kerosene are mixed in before shipping to retain liquidity; upon delivery, these lighter materials are separated out of the mixture. This mixture is often called bitumen feedstock, or BFS. Some trucks route the hot engine exhaust through pipes in the dump body to keep the material warm.  The backs of tippers carrying asphalt, as well as some handling equipment, are also commonly sprayed with a releasing agent before filling to aid release. Diesel oil is sometimes used as a agent, although it can mix with and thereby reduce the quality of the asphalt.HistoryGeological originImage:Puy de Poix, gisement bitumeux.JPG|thumb|right|Bituminous outcrop of the Puy de la Poix, Clermont-Ferrand, FranceNaturally occurring deposits of bitumen are formed from the remains of ancient, microscopic algae and other once-living things.  When these organisms died, their remains were deposited in the mud on the bottom of the ocean or lake where they lived. Under the heat and pressure of burial deep in the earth, the remains were transformed into materials such as bitumen, kerogen, or petroleum. Deposits at the Brea Tar Pits are an example.There are structural similarities between bitumens and the organic matter in carbonaceous meteorites.(Hayatsu etal., Meteoritics, Vol. 18, p.310) However, detailed studies have shown these materials to be distinct.(Kim & Yang Journal of Astronomy and Space Sciences, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 163-174)Ancient timesThe use of bitumen for waterproofing and as an adhesive dates at least to the third millennium BCE in the early Indus community of Mehrgarh where it was used to line the baskets in which they gathered crops.(McIntosh, Jane. The Ancient Indus Valley. p. 57)In the ancient East, the Sumerians used natural asphalt deposits for mortar between bricks and stones, to cement parts of carvings, such as eyes, into place, for ship caulking, and for waterproofing.( In some versions of the of Genesis in the Bible, the name of the substance used to bind the bricks of the of Babel is translated as bitumen (see Gen 11:3). A one-kilometre tunnel beneath the river Euphrates at Babylon in the time of Queen Semiramis (ca. 800 B.C.) was reportedly constructed of burnt bricks covered with bitumen as a waterproofing agent.() This must be regarded as legendary but indicative that the concept was known. The Persian word for asphalt is moom, which is related to the English word mummy. Asphalt was also used by Egyptians to embalm mummies.(() The Greek historian Herodotus said hot bitumen was used as mortar in the walls of Babylon.(Herodotus, Book I, 179)In the ancient East, natural asphalt was slowly boiled to get rid of the higher fractions, leaving a material of higher molecular weight which is thermoplastic and when layered on objects, became quite hard upon cooling. This was used to cover objects that needed waterproofing,( such as scabbards and other items. Statuettes of household deities were also cast with this type of material in Japan, and probably also in China.In America, archaeological recovery has indicated that asphalt was sometimes used to adhere stone points to a wooden shaft.(C.Michael Hogan (2008) Morro Creek, ed. by A. Burnham)Approximately 40 A.D. Dioscorides described production of asphaltos (as distinguished from pissasphalt and naphtha): (1655 Goodyer translation). The Judaicum Bitumen is a famous deposit of native asphalt seeping through diapirs at the bottom of the Dead Sea, which comes occasionally to the surface through seismic activity in blocks of up to 100 tons in weight which are more than 99.99% pure.  It was the object of the first known battle for a hydrocarbon deposit, between the Seleucids and the Nabateans in 312 B.C.()The Judaicum Bitumen is better than others; that is reckoned the best, which doth shine like purple, being of a strong scent & weightie, but the black and fowle is naught for it is adulterated with Pitch mixed with it. It growes in Phoenice also, and in Sidon, & in Babylon, & in Zacynthum. It is found also moyst swimming upon wells in the countrie of the Agrigentines of Sicilie, which they use for lamps instead of oyle, and which they call falsely Sicilian oyle, for it is a kinde of moyst Bitumen.( translated by Goodyer (1655) http://www.therenaissanceman.org/images/DIOSCORIDES-Intro_Book_1.doc or (Greek/Latin) compiled by Sprengel (1829) http://books.google.com/books/download/Pedanii_Dioscoridis_____de_materia_medic.pdf?idJwAUAAAAQAAJ&outputpdf p. 100 (p. 145 in PDF))The Sidon bitumen is thought to refer to bitumen found at Hasbeya.(The organic geochemistry of the Hasbeya asphalt (Lebanon): comparison with asphalts from the Dead Sea area and Iraq Jacques Connan and Arie Nissenbaumb Organic Geochemistry Volume 35, Issue 6, June 2004, Pages 775-789 doi:10.1016/j.orggeochem.2004.01.015) Pliny refers also to bitumen being found in Epirus.Early use in EuropeAn 1838 edition of Mechanics Magazine cites an early use of asphalt in France. A pamphlet dated 1621, by a certain Monsieur dEyrinys, states that he had discovered the existence (of asphaltum) in large quantities in the vicinity of Neufchatel, and that he proposed to use it in a variety of ways - principally in the construction of air-proof granaries, and in protecting, by means of the arches, the water-courses in the city of Paris from the intrusin of dirt and filth, which at that time made the water unusable. He expatiates also on the excellence of this material for forming level and durable terraces in palaces, the notion of forming such terraces in the streets not one likely to cross the brain of a Parisian of that generation.() But it was generally  neglected in France until the revolution of 1830. Then, in the 1830s, there was a surge of interest, and asphalt became widely used for pavements, flat roofs, and the lining of cisterns, and in England, some use of it had been made of it for similar purposes. Its rise in Europe was a sudden phenomenon, after natural deposits were found in France at Osbann (BasRhin), the Parc (lAin) and the Puy-de-la-Poix (Puy-de-Dome), although it could also be made artificially.(. Note: different sections of Miles online work were written in different years, as evidenced at the top of each page (not including the heading page of each section). This particular section appears to have been written in 2000) One of the earliest uses in France was the laying of about 24,000 square yards of Seyssel asphalt at the de la Concorde in 1835.()Photography and artBitumen was also used in early photographic technology. It was most notably used by French scientist Nicphore Nipce in the first picture ever taken. The bitumen used in his experiments were smeared on pewter plates and then exposed to light, thus making a black and white image.  It was similarly used to print millions of photochrom postcards.Bitumen was the nemesis of many artists during the 19th century.  Although widely used for a time, it ultimately proved unstable for use in oil painting, especially when mixed with the most common dilutents, such as linseed oil, varnish  and turpentine.  Unless thoroughly diluted, bitumen never fully solidifies and will in time corrupt the other pigments with which it comes into contact.  The use of bitumen as a glaze to set in shadow or mixed with other colors to render a darker tone resulted in the eventual deterioration of a good many paintings, those of Delacroix being just one notable example.Early use in the United KingdomAmong the earlier uses of asphalt in the United Kingdom, was for etching. William Salmons Polygraphice (1673) provides a recipe for varnish used in etching, consisting of three ounces of virgin wax, two ounces of mastic, and one ounce of asphaltum.() By the fifth edition in 1685, he had included more asphaltum recipes from other sources.( Text at Internet Archive)The first British patent for the use of asphalt was Cassells patent asphalte or bitumen in 1834.( Then on 25 November 1837, Richard Tappin Claridge patented the use of Seyssel asphalt (patent #7849), for use in asphalte pavement,()( Writer is replying to note or query from previous publication, cited as 9th S. xi. 30) having seen it employed in France and Belgium when visiting with Walter Simms, who worked with him on the introduction of asphalt to Britain.()()  Dr T. Lamb Phipson claims that his father, Samuel Ryland Phipson, a friend of Claridge, was also instrumental in introducing the asphalte pavement (in 1836).( Full text at Internet Archive (archive.org)) Indeed, mastic pavements had been previously employed at Vauxhall by a competitor of Claridge, but without success.(In 1838, Claridge obtained patents in Scotland on 27 March, and Ireland on 23 April, and in 1851 extensions were sought for all three patents, by the trustees of a company previously formed by Claridge.(()()() This was Claridges Patent Asphalte Company, formed in 1838 for the purpose of introducing to Britain Asphalte in its natural state from the mine at Pyrimont Seysell in France,( Full text at Internet Archive (archive.org). Alternative viewing at: http://books.google.com/books?idsQ5AAAAAYAAJ&pg) and laid one of the first asphalt pavements in Whitehall.(Miles, Lewis (2000), pp.10.06.1-2) Trials were made of the pavement in 1838 on the footway in Whitehall, the stable at Knightsbridge Barracks,((Comments on asphalt patents of R.T. Claridge, Esq (1904), p.18) and subsequently on the space at the bottom of the steps leading from Waterloo Place to St. James Park.( The formation in 1838 of Claridges Patent Asphalte Company (with a distinguished list of aristocratic patrons, and Marc and Isambard Brunel as, respectively, a trustee and consulting engineer), gave an enormous impetus to the development of a British asphalt industry.( By the end of 1838, at least two other companies, Robinsons and the Bastenne company, were in production,(Miles, Lewis (2000), p.10.06.2) with asphalt being laid as paving at Brighton, Herne Bay, Canterbury, Kensington, the Strand, and a large floor area in Bunhill-row, while meantime Claridges Whitehall paving continue(d) in good order.()Indeed in 1838, there was a flurry of entrepreneurial activity over asphalt, which had uses beyond paving. For example, asphalt could also used for flooring, damp proofing in buildings, and for waterproofing of various types of pools and baths, with these latter themselves proliferating in the 19th century.((( (Enter asphalt into the search field for list of pages discussing the subject)) On the London stockmarket, there were various claims as to the exclusivity of asphalt quality from France, Germany and England. And numerous patents were granted in France, with similar numbers of patent applications being denied in England due to their similarity to each other. In England, Claridges was the type most used in the 1840s and 50s (In 1914, Claridges Company entered into a joint venture to produce tar-bound macadam,() with materials manufactured through a subsidiary company called Clarmac Roads Ltd.() Two products resulted, namely Clarmac, and Clarphalte, with the former being manufactured by Clarmac Roads and the latter by Claridges Patent Asphalte Co., although Clarmac was more widely used.() However, the First World War  impacted financially on the Clarmac Company, which entered into liquidation in 1915.(Clarmac financial difficults due to WW1 Debentures deposited The Law Reports: Chancery Division, (1921) Vol. 1 p.545. Retrieved 17 June 2010.)() The failure of Clarmac Roads Ltd had a flow-on effect to Claridges Company, which was itself compulsorily wound up,(Claridges Patent Asphalte Co. compulsorily wound up Funds invested in new company The Law Times Reports (1921) Vol.125, p.256. Retrieved 15 June 2010.) ceasing operations in 1917,()() having invested a substantial amount of funds into the new venture, both at the outset,( and in a subsequent attempt to save the Clarmac Company.( Early use in the United States The first use of asphaltum in the New World was by indigenous peoples.  On the west coast, as early as the 13th century, the Tongva, Luiseo and Chumash peoples collected the naturally occurring asphaltum that seeped to the surface above underlying petroleum deposits.  All three used the substance as an adhesive.  It is found on many different artifacts of tools and ceremonial items. For example, it was used on rattles to adhere gourds or turtle shells to rattle handles.  It was also used in decorations.  Small round shell beads were often set in asphaltum to provide decorations.  It was used as a sealant on baskets to make them water tight for carrying water.  Asphaltum was used also to seal the planks on ocean-going canoes.Roads in the US have been paved with asphalt since at least 1870, when a street in front of Newark, NJs City Hall was paved.  In 1876, asphalt was used to pave Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, DC, in time for the celebration of the national centennial.() Asphalt was also used for flooring, paving and waterproofing of baths and swimming pools during the early 20th century, following similar trends in Europe.(Modern use Rolled asphalt concrete The largest use of asphalt is for making concrete for road surfaces and accounts for approximately 85% of the asphalt consumed in the States. Asphalt pavement material is commonly composed of 5 percent asphalt cement and 95 percent aggregates (stone, sand, and gravel). Due to its highly viscous nature, asphalt cement must be heated so that it can be mixed with the aggregates at the asphalt mixing plant. There are about 4,000 asphalt mixing plants in the U.S.Asphalt road surface is the most widely recycled material in the US, both by gross tonnage and by percentage.  According to a report issued by the Highway Administration and the States Environmental Protection Agency, 80% of the asphalt removed each year from road surfaces during widening and resurfacing projects is reused as part of new roads, roadbeds, shoulders and embankments.Roofing shingles account for most of the remaining asphalt consumption. Other uses include cattle sprays, fence post treatments, and waterproofing for fabrics.Asphalt is widely used in airports around the world. Due to the sturdiness, it is widely used for runways dedicated to aircraft landing and taking off. Mastic asphalt asphalt is a type of asphalt which differs from dense graded asphalt (concrete) in that it has a higher bitumen (binder) content, usually around 710% of the whole aggregate mix, as opposed to rolled asphalt, which has only around 5% added bitumen. This thermoplastic substance is widely used in the building industry for waterproofing flat roofs and tanking underground.  Mastic asphalt is heated to a temperature of  and is spread in layers to form an impervious barrier about  thick. Asphalt emulsion A number of technologies allow asphalt to be mixed at much lower temperatures. These involve mixing the asphalt with petroleum solvents to form cutbacks with reduced melting point or mixtures with water to turn the asphalt into an emulsion. Asphalt emulsions contain up to 70% asphalt and typically less than 1.5% chemical additives. There are two main types of emulsions with different affinity for aggregates, cationic and anionic. Asphalt emulsions are used in a wide variety of applications. Chipseal involves spraying the road surface with asphalt emulsion followed by a layer of crushed rock, gravel or crushed slag. Slurry Seal involves the creation of a mixture of asphalt emulsion and fine crushed aggregate that is spread on the surface of a road. Cold mixed asphalt can also be made from asphalt emulsion to create pavements similar to hot-mixed asphalt, several inches in depth and asphalt emulsions are also blended into recycled hot-mix asphalt to create low cost pavements.Other usesThin bitumen plates are sometimes used by computer enthusiasts for silencing computer cases or noisy computer parts such as the hard drive. Bitumen layers are baked onto the outside of high end dishwashers to provide sound insulation. Bitumen also is used in paint and marker inks by some graffiti supply companies (primarily Molotow) to increase the weather resistance and permanence of the paint and/or ink, and to make the color much darker.Petroleum production, alternatives and bioasphalt Naturally occurring crude bitumen impregnated in sedimentary rock is the prime feed stock for petroleum production from sands, currently under development in Alberta, Canada. Canada has most of the worlds supply of natural bitumen, covering 140,000 square kilometres( (an area larger than England), giving it the second largest proven reserves in the world. The oil sands is the largest bitumen deposit in Canada and the only one accessible to mining, although recent technological breakthroughs have resulted in deeper deposits becoming producible by in-situ methods. Because of price increases since 2003, upgrading bitumen to synthetic oil has become highly profitable. As of 2006 Canadian crude bitumen production averaged about  per day and was projected to rise to  per day by 2020.( The total amount of crude bitumen in Alberta which could be extracted is estimated to be about ,() which at a rate of  would last about 200 years.Certain activist groups have become increasingly concerned about the global oil and change problem in recent years due to by-products that are released into the atmosphere. Most of the emissions are derived primarily from burning fuels. This has led to the introduction of petroleum alternatives such as bioasphalt that are more environmentally friendly and less toxic.Bitumen can now be made from non-petroleum based renewable resources such as sugar, molasses and rice, corn and potato starches.  Bitumen can also be made from waste material by distillation of used motor oils, which is sometimes disposed by burning or dumping into land fills.  Non-petroleum based bitumen binders can be made light-colored. Roads made with lighter-colored pitch absorb less heat from solar radiation, and become less hot than darker surfaces, reducing their contribution to the heat island effect.(http://www.epa.gov/heatisland/ EPA)See also*Blacktop*Asphalt solar collector*Tarmac*Grooving & Grinding Association* Bioasphalt* Asphaltene* fuel* coal* rocks* sands* (resin)* Tar* SealcoatReferencesLiterature* Barth, Edwin J., Asphalt:  Science and Technology Gordon and Breach (1962).  ISBN 0-677-00040-5.**NotesExternal links**Pavement Interactive - Asphalt*U.S EPA*Asphalt Magazine*CSU Sacramento, The World Famous Asphalt Museum!*National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health - Asphalt Fumesar:ar:an:Gudrnaz:Asfaltaz:Bitumbe:be-x-old:bs:Bitumenbg:bg:ca:Asfalt(geologia)cs:iviceda:Bitumende:Bitumenet:Bituumenel:es:Betneo:Bitumo(hidrokarburo)fa:fr:Bitumegl:Asfaltohi:hr:Asfaltio:Bitumoio:Asfaltoid:Aspalis:Malbikit:Bitumehe:kk:ku:Asfaltlt:Bitumashu:Aszfaltms:Asfaltnl:Bitumenja:ja:nap:Asfardono:Bitumennn:Asfaltpl:Bitumypl:Asfaltpt:Betumero:Asfaltru:sk:Asfaltsl:Bitumensh:Asfaltsr:fi:Bitumisv:Bitumentl:Aspaltoth:tr:Asfaltuk:uk:vi:Bitumzh-yue:zh:
