717
Alberta
 Website  www.alberta.caAlberta  is a province of Canada. It had an estimated population of 3.7 million in 2010() making it the most populous of Canadas three prairie provinces. Alberta and its neighbour, Saskatchewan, were established as provinces on September 1, 1905.()Alberta is located in Canada, bounded by the provinces of Columbia to the west and Saskatchewan to the east, the Territories to the north, and the state of Montana to the south. Alberta is one of three Canadian provinces and territories to border only a single U.S. state and is also one of only two provinces that are landlocked.Edmonton, the city of Alberta, is located near the geographic centre of the province and is the primary supply and service hub for Canadas oil sands and other northern resource industries. Approximately  south of the capital is Calgary, Albertas largest city and a major distribution and transportation hub. According to recent population estimates, these two metropolitan areas have now both exceeded 1 million people.() Census agglomerations in the province include Lethbridge, Red Deer, Prairie, Hat, Wood Buffalo (includes McMurray), Lloydminster, Brooks, Okotoks, Camrose, Canmore, Cold Lake, and Wetaskiwin.(  Notable tourist destinations in the province include Canmore, Sylvan Lake, Drumheller, Banff, and Jasper.Alberta is named after Princess Louise Caroline Alberta (18481939),() the fourth daughter of Victoria, the of Canada until 1901, and Prince Consort. Princess Louise was the wife of the Marquess of Lorne, General of Canada from 1878 to 1883. Lake Louise, the Village of Caroline, and Alberta were also named in honour of Princess Louise.The current Premier of the province is Redford. Geography Alberta, with an area of () is the fourth largest province after Quebec, Ontario, and British Columbia. To the south, the province borders on the parallel north, separating it from the U.S. state of Montana, while on the north the parallel north divides it from the Territories. To the east the meridian west separates it from the province of Saskatchewan, while on the west its boundary with British Columbia follows the meridian west south from the Northwest Territories at 60N until it reaches the Divide at the Mountains, and from that point follows the line of peaks marking the Continental Divide in a generally southeasterly direction until it reaches the Montana border at 49N.The province extends  north to south and  east to west at its maximum width. Its highest point is  at the summit of Mount Columbia in the Rocky Mountains along the southwest border, while its lowest point is  on the River in Buffalo National Park in the northeast.()With the exception of the semi-arid steppe of the southeastern section, the province has adequate resources. There are numerous rivers and lakes used for swimming, fishing and a range of sports. There are three large lakes, Lake Claire () in Buffalo National Park, Slave Lake (), and Athabasca () which lies in both Alberta and Saskatchewan. The longest river in the province is the River which travels  from the Icefield in the Rocky Mountains to Lake Athabasca.() The largest river is the Peace River with an average flow of 2161 m3/s. The Peace River originates in the Rocky Mountains of northern British Columbia and flows through northern Alberta and into the River, a tributary of the River.File:Moraine Lake 17092005.jpg|thumb|250px|right|Lake in National Park.Albertas capital city, Edmonton, is located approximately in the geographic centre of the province. It is the most northerly major city in Canada, and serves as a gateway and hub for resource development in northern Canada. The region, with its proximity to Canadas largest fields, has most of western Canadas oil refinery capacity. Calgary is located approximately  south of Edmonton and  north of Montana, surrounded by extensive ranching country. Almost 75% of the provinces population lives in the Corridor.Most of the northern half of the province is forest, while the Mountains along the southwestern boundary are largely forested (see Mountain forests and Columbia foothills forests). The southern quarter of the province is prairie, ranging from prairie in the southeastern corner to mixed grass prairie in an arc to the west and north of it. The central parkland region extending in a broad arc between the prairies and the forests, from Calgary, north to Edmonton, and then east to Lloydminster, contains the most fertile soil in the province and most of the population. Much of the unforested part of Alberta is given over either to grain or to farming, with farming more common in the north and centre, while ranching and agriculture predominate in the south.()The Alberta badlands are located in southeastern Alberta, where the Deer River crosses the flat prairie and farmland, and features deep canyons and striking landforms. Provincial Park, near Alberta, showcases the badlands terrain, desert flora, and remnants from Albertas past when dinosaurs roamed the then lush landscape. Climate Alberta has a dry climate with warm summers and cold winters. The province is open to cold arctic weather systems from the north, which often produce extremely cold conditions in winter. As the fronts between the air masses shift north and south across Alberta, temperature can change rapidly. Arctic air masses in the winter produce extreme minimum temperatures varying from  in northern Alberta to  in southern Alberta. In the summer, continental air masses produce maximum temperatures from  in the mountains to  in southern Alberta.()Alberta extends for over  from north to south; its climate, therefore, varies considerably. Average temperatures in January range from  in the south to  in the north, and in July from  in the south to  in the north.  The climate is also influenced by the presence of the Rocky Mountains to the southwest, which disrupt the flow of the prevailing westerly winds and cause them to drop most of their moisture on the western slopes of the mountain ranges before reaching the province, casting a shadow over much of Alberta. The northerly location and isolation from the weather systems of the Ocean cause Alberta to have a dry climate with little moderation from the ocean. Annual precipitation ranges from  in the southeast to  in the north, except in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains where rainfall can reach  annually.(In the summer, the average daytime temperatures range from around  in the Rocky Mountain valleys and far north to  in the dry prairie of the southeast. The northern and western parts of the province experience higher rainfall and lower evaporation rates caused by cooler summer temperatures. The south and east-central portions are prone to drought-like conditions sometimes persisting for several years, although even these areas can receive heavy precipitation.Alberta is a sunny province. Annual bright sunshine totals range between 1900 and 2500 hours per year. Northern Alberta receives about 18 hours of daylight in the summer.(In southwestern Alberta, the cold winters are frequently interrupted by warm, dry winds blowing from the mountains, which can propel temperatures upward from frigid conditions to well above the freezing point in a very short period. During one chinook recorded at Creek, temperatures soared from  to  in one hour.(  The region around Lethbridge has the most chinooks, averaging 30 to 35 chinook days per year, while Calgary has a Christmas only 59% of the time as a result of these winds. Northern Alberta is mostly covered by boreal forest and has a climate. The agricultural area of southern Alberta have a semi-arid steppe climate because the annual precipitation is less than the water that evaporates or is used by plants. The southeastern corner of Alberta, part of the Triangle, experiences greater summer heat and lower rainfall than the rest of the province, and as a result suffers frequent yield problems and occasional severe droughts. Western Alberta is protected by the mountains and enjoys the mild temperatures brought by winter winds. Central and parts of northwestern Alberta in the Peace River region are largely aspen parkland, a biome transitional between prairie to the south and boreal forest to the north.After Ontario, Alberta is the most likely region in Canada to experience tornadoes. Thunderstorms, some of them severe, are frequent in the summer, especially in central and southern Alberta. The region surrounding the Corridor is notable for having the highest frequency of hail in Canada, which is caused by lifting from the nearby Rocky Mountains, enhancing the updraft/downdraft cycle necessary for the formation of hail.Image:Banff Trail 2.jpg|Winter climate at Banff Trail station in Calgary.Image:DinosaurProvincialParkHoodoo.jpg|Hoodoos in Provincial Park.Image:May 2011 Wildfires in Alberta, Canada.jpg|Satellite image of wildfires in Alberta. Ecology  Flora In central and northern Alberta the arrival of spring brings the prairie crocus anemone, the three flowered avens, bean, wild rose and other early flowers. The advancing summer introduces many flowers of the sunflower family, until in August the plains are one blaze of yellow and purple. The southern and east central parts of Alberta are covered by a short, nutritious grass, which dries up as summer lengthens, to be replaced by hardy perennials such as the prairie coneflower, fleabane, and sage. Both yellow and white clover fill the ditches with their beauty and aromatic scents.The trees in the parkland region of the province grow in clumps and belts on the hillsides. These are largely deciduous, typically aspen, poplar, and willow. Many species of willow and other shrubs grow in virtually any terrain. On the north side of the North Saskatchewan River evergreen forests prevail for hundreds of thousands of square kilometres. Aspen poplar, poplar (or cottonwood), and birch are the primary large deciduous species. Conifers include pine, Rocky Mountain pine, pine, both white and black spruce, and the deciduous conifer tamarack. Fauna Image:Ovis canadensis 2.jpg|thumb|right|200px|The sheep is Albertas provincial animalThe four climatic regions (alpine, forest, parkland, and prairie) of Alberta are home to many different species of animals. The south and central prairie was the land of the bison, commonly known as buffalo, its grasses providing pasture and breeding ground for millions of buffalo. The buffalo population was decimated during early settlement, but since then buffalo have made a comeback, living on farms and in parks all over Alberta.Alberta is home to many large carnivores. Among them are the grizzly and black bears, which are found in the mountains and wooded regions. Smaller carnivores of the canine and feline families include coyotes, wolves, fox, lynx, bobcat and lion (cougar).Herbivorous animals are found throughout the province. Moose, deer, and deer are found in the wooded regions, and pronghorn can be found in the prairies of southern Alberta. sheep and goats live in the Mountains. Rabbits, porcupines, skunks, squirrels and many species of rodents and reptiles live in every corner of the province. Alberta is home to only one variety of snake, the prairie rattlesnake.thumb|left|200px|Water birds in EdmontonCentral and northern Alberta and the region farther north is the nesting ground of many migratory birds. Vast numbers of ducks, geese, swans and pelicans arrive in Alberta every spring and nest on or near one of the hundreds of small lakes that dot northern Alberta. Eagles, hawks, owls and crows are plentiful, and a huge variety of smaller seed and insect-eating birds can be found. Alberta, like other temperate regions, is home to mosquitoes, flies, wasps, and bees. Rivers and lakes are populated with pike, walleye, whitefish, rainbow, speckled, and brown trout, and even sturgeon. Turtles are found in some water bodies in the southern part of the province. Frogs and salamanders are a few of the amphibians that make their homes in Alberta.Alberta is the only province in Canadaas well as one of the few places in the worldthat is free of Norwegian rats.() Since the early 1950s, the government of Alberta has operated a rat-control program, which has been so successful that only isolated instances of wild rat sightings are reported, usually of rats arriving in the province aboard trucks or by rail. In 2006, Alberta Agriculture reports zero findings of wild rats; the only rat interceptions have been domesticated rats that have been seized from their owners. It is illegal for individual Albertans to own or keep Norwegian rats of any description; the animals can be kept in the province by only zoos, universities and colleges, and recognized research institutions. In 2009, several rats werefound and captured, in small pockets in Southern Alberta,() putting Albertas rat-free status in jeopardy. History File:Alexander Rutherford.jpg|right|thumb|150px|C. Rutherford, Albertas first premierThe first people in Alberta were Paleo-Indians who arrived in Alberta at least 10,000 years ago, toward the end of the ice age. They probably migrated from Siberia to Alaska on a land bridge across the Strait, and then may have moved down the east side of the Mountains through Alberta to settle the Americas. Alternatively they may have migrated down the coast of British Columbia and then moved inland.() Over time they differentiated into various Nations peoples, including the Indian tribes of southern Alberta such as those of the Confederacy and the Cree, who generally lived by hunting buffalo (bison), and the more northerly tribes such as the Cree and  Chipewyan who hunted, trapped, and fished for a living.()After the British arrival in Canada, approximately half of the province of Alberta, south of the River drainage, became part of Land which consisted of all land drained by rivers flowing into Bay. This area was granted by II of England to the Bay Company (HBC) in 1670, and rival fur trading companies were not allowed to trade in it. After the arrival of Canadians in the west around 1731, they settled near fur trading posts, establishing communities such as Lac La Biche and Bonnyville. Fort La Jonquire was established near what is now Calgary in 1752.The Athabasca River and the rivers north of it were not in HBC territory because they drained into the Ocean instead of Hudson Bay, and they were prime habitat for fur-bearing animals. The first explorer of the Athabasca region was Pond, who learned of the Portage, which allowed travel from southern  rivers into the rivers north of Ruperts Land.  Fur traders formed the West Company (NWC) of Montreal to compete with the HBC in 1779. The NWC occupied the northern part of Alberta territory. Peter Pond built Fort Athabasca on Lac la Biche in 1778. Roderick Mackenzie built Chipewyan on Lake Athabasca ten years later in 1788. His cousin, Sir Alexander Mackenzie, followed the Saskatchewan River to its northernmost point near Edmonton, then setting northward on foot, trekked to the Athabasca River, which he followed to Lake Athabasca. It was there he discovered the mighty outflow river which bears his namethe Riverwhich he followed to its outlet in the Ocean. Returning to Lake Athabasca, he followed the Peace River upstream, eventually reaching the Ocean, and so he became the first white man to cross the North American continent north of Mexico.()The extreme southernmost portion of Alberta was part of the French (and Spanish) territory of Louisiana, sold to the United States in 1803; in 1818, the portion of Louisiana north of the Forty-Ninth Parallel was ceded to Great Britain.Fur trade expanded in the north, but bloody battles occurred between the rival HBC and NWC, and in 1821 the British government forced them to merge to stop the hostilities. The amalgamated Hudsons Bay Company dominated trade in Alberta until 1870, when the newly formed Government purchased Ruperts Land. Northern Alberta was included in the Territory until 1870, when it and Ruperts land became Canadas Territories.The district of Alberta was created as part of the North-West Territories in 1882. As settlement increased, local representatives to the North-West Legislative Assembly were added. After a long campaign for autonomy, in 1905 the district of Alberta was enlarged and given provincial status, with the election of Cameron Rutherford as the first premier. Demographics Alberta has enjoyed a relatively high rate of growth in recent years, mainly because of its burgeoning economy. Between 2003 and 2004, the province had high birthrates (on par with some larger provinces such as British Columbia), relatively high immigration, and a high rate of interprovincial migration when compared to other provinces.()Approximately 81% of the population live in urban areas and only about 19% live in rural areas. The Calgary-Edmonton Corridor is the most urbanized area in the province and is one of the most densely populated areas of Canada.() Many of Albertas cities and towns have also experienced very high rates of growth in recent history. Over the past century, Albertas population rose from 73,022 in 1901 to 2,974,807 in 2001() and 3,290,350 according to the 2006 census.()The 2006 census found that English, with 2,576,670 native speakers, was the most common mother tongue of Albertans, representing 79.99% of the provinces population. The next most common mother tongues were various languages with 97,275 native speakers (3.02%), followed by German with 84,505 native speakers (2.62%) and French with 61,225 (1.90%).()Other mother tongues (in decreasing order) include: Punjabi, with 36,320 native speakers (1.13%); Tagalog, with 29,740 (0.92%); Ukrainian, with 29,455 (0.91%); Spanish, with 29,125 (0.90%); Polish, with 21,990 (0.68%); Arabic, with 20,495 (0.64%); Dutch, with 19,980 (0.62%); and Vietnamese, with 19,350 (0.60%). The most common aboriginal language is Cree 17,215 (0.53%). Other common  mother tongues include Italian with 13,095 speakers (0.41%); Urdu with 11,275 (0.35%); and Korean with 10,845 (0.33%); then Hindi 8,985 (0.28%); Persian 7,700 (0.24%); Portuguese 7,205 (0.22%); and Hungarian 6,770 (0.21%).(Figures shown are for the number of single language responses and the percentage of total single-language responses.)(Alberta has considerable ethnic diversity. In line with the rest of Canada, many immigrants originated from England,  Scotland, Ireland and Wales, but large numbers also came from other parts of Europe, notably Germans, French, Ukrainians and Scandinavians.() According to Statistics Canada, Alberta is home to the second highest proportion (two percent) of Francophones in western Canada (after Manitoba). Despite this, relatively few Albertans claim French as their mother tongue. Many of Albertas French-speaking residents live in the central and northwestern regions of the province.As reported in the 2001 census, the Chinese represented nearly four percent of Albertas population, and East Indians represented more than two percent. Both Edmonton and Calgary have historic Chinatowns, and Calgary has Canadas third largest Chinese community. The Chinese presence began with workers employed in the building of the Canadian Pacific Railway in the 1880s. Aboriginal Albertans make up approximately three percent of the population.In the 2006 Canadian census, the most commonly reported ethnic origins among Albertans were: 885,825 English (27.2%); 679,705 German (20.9%); 667,405 Canadian (20.5%); 661,265 Scottish (20.3%); 539,160 Irish (16.6%); 388,210 French (11.9%); 332,180 Ukrainian (10.2%); 172,910 Dutch (5.3%); 170,935 Polish (5.2%); 169,355 American Indian (5.2%); 144,585 Norwegian (4.4%); and 137,600 Chinese (4.2%). (Each person could choose as many ethnicities as were applicable.)()Amongst those of British origins, the Scots have had a particularly strong influence on place-names, with the names of many cities and towns including Calgary, Airdrie, Canmore, and Banff having Scottish origins.Alberta is the third most diverse province in terms of minorities after British Columbia and Ontario with 13.9% of the population consisting of minorities.() Nearly one-fourth of the populations of Calgary and Edmonton belong to a visible minority group.()Aboriginal Identity Peoples make up 5.8% of the population, about half of whom consist of American Indians and the other half are Metis. There are also small number of Inuit people in Alberta.() The number of Aboriginal Identity Peoples have been increasing at a rate greater than the population of Alberta.(As of the 2001 Census the largest religious group was Roman Catholic, representing 25.7% of the population. Alberta had the second highest percentage of non-religious residents in Canada (after British Columbia) at 23.1% of the population. Of the remainder, 13.5% of the population identified themselves as belonging to the Church of Canada, while 5.9% were Anglican. Lutherans made up 4.8% of the population while Baptists comprised 2.5%.The remainder belonged to a wide variety of different religious affiliations, none of which constituted more than 2% of the population. The Mormons of Alberta reside primarily in the extreme south of the province and made up 1.7% of the population. Alberta has a population of Hutterites, a communal Anabaptist sect similar to the Mennonites (Hutterites represented 0.4% of the population while Mennonites were 0.8%), and has a significant population of Seventh-day Adventists at 0.3%. Alberta is home to several Rite Churches as part of the legacy of Eastern European immigration, including the Catholic Eparchy of Edmonton, and the Orthodox Church of Canadas Western Diocese which is based in Edmonton.()Muslims, Sikhs, and Hindus live in Alberta. Muslims constituted 1.7% of the population, Sikhs 0.8% and Hindus 0.5%. Many of these are recent immigrants, but others have roots that go back to the first settlers of the prairies.( Canadas oldest mosque, the Mosque is located in Edmonton,() whereas the Canadas largest mosque, the Nur mosque is located in Calgary.() Jews constituted 0.4% of Albertas population. Most of Albertas 13,000 Jews live in Calgary (7,500) and Edmonton (5,000).(AM YisraelThe Jewish Communities of Canada) Municipalities ;Largest metro areas and municipalities by population as of 2006File:Edmonton Skyline Panorama.jpg|thumb|800px|center|EdmontonFile:Calgary panorama-2.jpg|thumb|800px|center|Calgary Economy Albertas economy is one of the strongest in Canada, supported by the burgeoning petroleum industry and to a lesser extent, agriculture and technology. The per capita GDP in 2007 was by far the highest of any province in Canada at C$74,825. This was 61% higher than the national average of C$46,441 and more than twice that of some of the Atlantic provinces. In 2006 the deviation from the national average was the largest for any province in Canadian history.() According to the 2006 census,() the median annual family income after taxes was $70,986 in Alberta (compared to $60,270 in Canada as a whole).The Calgary-Edmonton Corridor is the most urbanized region in the province and one of the densest in Canada. The region covers a distance of roughly 400 kilometres north to south. In 2001, the population of the Calgary-Edmonton Corridor was 2.15 million (72% of Albertas population).() It is also one of the fastest growing regions in the country. A 2003 study by Bank Financial Group found the corridor to be the only Canadian urban centre to amass a U.S. level of wealth while maintaining a Canadian style of life, offering health care benefits. The study found that GDP per capita in the corridor was 10% above average U.S. metropolitan areas and 40% above other Canadian cities at that time.The Institute states that Alberta also has very high levels of freedom and rates Alberta as the freest economy in Canada,() and the second freest economy amongst U.S. states and Canadian provinces.() Industry File:Syncrude mildred lake plant.jpg|thumb|right|250px|Mildred Lake mine site and plant at the Oil Sands.Alberta is the largest producer of conventional crude oil, crude, gas and gas products in the country. Alberta is the worlds 2nd largest exporter of natural gas and the 4th largest producer.() Two of the largest producers of petrochemicals in America are located in central and north-central Alberta. In both Red Deer and Edmonton, world class polyethylene and vinyl manufacturers produce products shipped all over the world, and Edmontons oil refineries provide the raw materials for a large petrochemical industry to the east of Edmonton.The oil sands have estimated oil reserves approximately equal to the oil reserves of the rest of the world, estimated to be 1.6 trillion barrels (254 km3). With the development of new extraction methods such as assisted gravity drainage, which was developed in Alberta, bitumen and synthetic crude oil can be produced at costs close to those of conventional crude. Many companies employ both conventional strip mining and non-conventional situ methods to extract the bitumen from the sands. With current technology and at current prices, about 315 billion barrels (50 km3) of bitumen are recoverable. McMurray, one of Canadas fastest growing  cities, has grown enormously in recent years because of the large corporations which have taken on the task of oil production. As of late 2006 there were over $100 billion in oil sands projects under construction or in the planning stages in northeastern Alberta.()Another factor determining the viability of oil extraction from the sands is the price of oil. The price increases since 2003 have made it more than profitable to extract this oil, which in the past would give little profit or even a loss.With concerted effort and support from the provincial government, several high-tech industries have found their birth in Alberta, notably patents related to interactive crystal display systems.(Interactive display systemUS Patent U.S. Patent No. 5,448,263; U.S. Patent for Touch Sensitive TechnologySMART Technologies) With a growing economy, Alberta has several financial institutions dealing with civil and private funds. Agriculture and forestry File:Warner Elevator Row.jpg|thumb|250px|right|The elevator row, the last surviving elevator row in Alberta, currently unprotected.Agriculture has a significant position in the provinces economy. The province has over three million head of cattle,(Alberta Livestock InspectionsAugust 2006Alberta Government, Department of Agriculture) and Alberta beef has a healthy worldwide market. Nearly one half of all Canadian beef is produced in Alberta. Alberta is one of the prime producers of plains buffalo (bison) for the consumer market. Sheep for wool and mutton are also raised.Wheat and canola are primary farm crops, with Alberta leading the provinces in spring wheat production; other grains are also prominent. Much of the farming is dryland farming, often with fallow seasons interspersed with cultivation. Continuous cropping (in which there is no fallow season) is gradually becoming a more common mode of production because of increased profits and a reduction of soil erosion. Across the province, the once common elevator is slowly being lost as rail lines are decreasing; farmers typically truck the grain to central points.Alberta is the leading beekeeping province of Canada, with some beekeepers wintering hives indoors in specially designed barns in southern Alberta, then migrating north during the summer into the Peace River valley where the season is short but the working days are long for honeybees to produce honey from clover and fireweed. Hybrid canola also requires bee pollination, and some beekeepers service this need.The vast northern forest reserves of softwood allow Alberta to produce large quantities of lumber, oriented strand board (OSB) and plywood, and several plants in northern Alberta supply North America and the Rim nations with bleached pulp and newsprint. Tourism File:Stephen Avenue.jpg|thumb|250px|right|Avenue, Calgary.Alberta has been a tourist destination from the early days of the twentieth century, with attractions including outdoor locales for skiing, hiking and camping, shopping locales such as Edmonton Mall, Stampede, outdoor festivals, professional athletic events, international sporting competitions such as the Games and Games, as well as more eclectic attractions. There are also natural attractions like Island National Park, Buffalo National Park, and the Icefield.According to Alberta Economic Development, Calgary and Edmonton both host over four million visitors annually. Banff, Jasper and the Rocky Mountains are visited by about three million people per year.() Alberta tourism relies heavily on Ontario tourists, as well as tourists from other parts of Canada, the States, and many international countries.Albertas Rocky Mountains include well known tourist destinations Banff National Park and National Park. The two mountain parks are connected by the scenic Parkway. Banff is located  west of Calgary on Highway 1, and Jasper is located  west of Edmonton on Highway. Five of Canadas fourteen UNESCO heritage sites are located within the province: Rocky Mountain Parks, International Peace Park, Wood Buffalo National Park, Provincial Park and Buffalo Jump.File:Lake Louise 17092005.jpg|thumb|250px|right|Lake Louise in the Rockies.About 1.2 million people visit the of Stampede,() a celebration of Canadas own West and the cattle ranching industry. About 700,000 people enjoy Edmontons Ex (formerly Klondike Days).() Edmonton was the gateway to the only all-Canadian route to the Yukon gold fields, and the only route which did not require gold-seekers to travel the exhausting and dangerous Pass.Another tourist destination that draws more than 650,000 visitors each year is the Drumheller Valley, located northeast of Calgary. Drumheller, Dinosaur Capital of The World, offers the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology. Drumheller also had a rich mining history being one of Western Canadas largest coal producers during the war years. The Canadian Badlands has much to offer in the way of attractions, cultural events, celebrations, accommodations and service.Located in east-central Alberta is Prairie Railway Excursions, a popular tourist attraction operated out of Stettler. It boasts one of the few operable steam trains in the world, offering trips through the rolling prairie scenery. Alberta Prairie Railway Excursions caters to tens of thousands of visitors every year.Alberta is an important destination for tourists who love to ski and hike; Alberta boasts several world-class resorts such as Village, Lake Louise, Basin, Norquay and Nakiska. Hunters and fishermen from around the world are able to take home impressive trophies and tales from their experiences in Albertas wilderness. Taxation The provinces revenue comes mainly from royalties on non-renewable natural resources (30.4%), personal income taxes (22.3%), corporate and other taxes (19.6%), and grants from the federal government primarily for infrastructure projects (9.8%).() Albertans are the lowest-taxed people in Canada, and Alberta is the only province in Canada without a provincial tax (though residents are still subject to the federal sales tax, the Goods and Services Tax of 5%.) It is also the only Canadian province to have a single rate of taxation for personal income taxes which is 10% of taxable income.()The Alberta tax system maintains a progressive character by allowing residents to earn $16,161 before becoming subject to provincial taxation in addition to a variety of tax deductions for persons with disabilities, students, and the aged.() Albertas municipalities and school jurisdictions have their own governments which (usually) work in co-operation with the provincial government.Alberta also privatized alcohol distribution.  The privatization increased outlets from 304 stores to 1,726; 1,300 jobs to 4,000 jobs; and 3,325 products to 16,495 products.() Tax revenue also increased from $400 million to $700 million. Transportation File:DavidThompsonHighway.JPG|right|thumb|220px|David Thompson Highway outside of National Park.Alberta has over  of highways and roads, of which nearly  are paved. The main north-south corridor is Highway 2, which begins south of Cardston at the Carway border crossing and is part of the Corridor. Highway 4, which effectively extends 15 into Alberta and is the busiest U.S. gateway to the province, begins at the Coutts border crossing and ends at Lethbridge. Highway 3 joins Lethbridge to Fort Macleod and links Highway 4 to Highway 2. Highway 2 travels northward through Fort Macleod, Calgary, Red Deer, and Edmonton.North of Edmonton, the highway continues to Athabasca, then northwesterly along the south shore of Slave Lake into High Prairie, north to Peace River, west to Fairview and finally south to Prairie, where it ends at an interchange with Highway 43. The section of Highway 2 between Calgary and Edmonton has been named the Elizabeth II Highway to commemorate the visit of the monarch in 2005.  Highway 2 is supplemented by two more highways that run parallel to it: Highway 22, west of Highway 2, known as Cowboy Trail, and Highway 21, east of Highway 2. Highway 43 travels northwest into Grande Prairie and the River Country; Highway 63 travels northeast to McMurray, the location of the Athabasca Oil Sands.Alberta has two main east-west corridors. The southern corridor, part of the Highway system, enters the province near Medicine Hat, runs westward through Calgary, and leaves Alberta through Banff National Park. The northern corridor, also part of the Trans-Canada network and known as the Highway (Highway 16), runs west from Lloydminster in eastern Alberta, through Edmonton and National Park into Columbia. One of the most scenic drives is along the Parkway, which runs for  between Jasper and Lake Louise, with mountain ranges and glaciers on either side of its entire length.Another major corridor through central Alberta is Highway 11 (also known as the David Thompson Highway), which runs east from the Saskatchewan River Crossing in Banff National Park through Mountain House and Red Deer, connecting with Highway 12  west of Stettler. The highway connects many of the smaller towns in central Alberta with Calgary and Edmonton, as it crosses Highway 2 just west of Red Deer.Urban stretches of Albertas major highways and freeways are often called trails. For example, Highway 2, the main north-south highway in the province, is called Trail as it passes through Calgary but becomes Trail (for southbound traffic) and Boulevard (for northbound traffic) as it enters Edmonton and then turns into St. Albert Trail as it leaves Edmonton for the City of St. Albert. Calgary, in particular, has a tradition of calling its largest urban expressways trails and naming many of them after prominent Nations individuals and tribes, such as Trail, Deerfoot Trail, and Trail.Calgary, Edmonton, Red Deer, Medicine Hat, and Lethbridge have substantial transit systems. In addition to buses, Calgary and Edmonton operate rail transit (LRT) systems. LRT, which is underground in the downtown core and on the surface outside of it, was the first of the modern generation of light rail systems to be built in North America, while the Calgary C-Train has one of the highest number of daily riders of any LRT system in North America.Alberta is well-connected by air, with airports in both Calgary and Edmonton. International Airport and International Airport are the fourth and fifth busiest in Canada respectively. Calgarys airport is a hub for WestJet Airlines and a regional hub for Canada. Calgarys airport primarily serves the Canadian prairie provinces (Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba) for connecting flights to British Columbia, eastern Canada, 15 major US centres, nine European airports, one Asian airport and four destinations in Mexico and the Caribbean.()  Edmontons airport acts as a hub for the Canadian north and has connections to all major Canadian airports as well as 10 major US airports, 3 European airports and 6 Mexican and Caribbean airports.()There are over  of operating mainline railway, and many tourists see Alberta aboard Rail or Mountaineer. The Pacific Railway and National Railway companies operate railway freight across the province. Health care File:Alberta Childrens Hospital 3+4.jpg|thumb|220px|right|Childrens HospitalAs with all Canadian provinces, Alberta provides for all citizens and residents through a funded health care system. Alberta became Canadas second province (after Saskatchewan) to adopt a Douglas-style program in 1950, a precursor to the modern medicare system.Albertas health care budget is currently $13.2 billion during the 20082009 fiscal year (approximately 36% of all government spending), making it the best funded health care system per-capita in Canada. Every hour more than $1.5 million is spent on health care in the province.()File:University Hospital Complex University Of Alberta Edmonton Alberta Canada 02A.jpg|thumb|220px|left|of Alberta Hospital complex.A highly educated population and burgeoning economy have made Alberta a national leader in health education, research, and resources. Many notable facilities include the Medical Centre, the Lougheed Centre, General Hospital, Childrens Hospital, Grace Womens Health Centre, The University of Calgary Medical Centre (UCMC), Baker Cancer Centre and Cardiovascular Institute of Alberta, in Calgary; In Edmonton, the of Alberta Hospital,  the Royal Alexandra Hospital, the Alberta Heart Institute, the Lois Hole Hospital for Women, the Childrens Hospital, the Alberta Diabetes Institute, the Cancer Institute, and the Rexall Centre for Pharmacy and Health Research in Edmonton. Currently under construction in Edmonton is the new $909 million Clinic, which will provide a similar research, education, and care environment as the Clinic in the States.()Care in Alberta is administered by the unified Alberta Health Services Board. Prior to July 1, 2008, Alberta was divided into nine health regions: Regional Health Authority: Health Region, Health (Edmonton), Health, Thompson Regional Health Authority, Central Health, Lights Health Region, Health Region and Country Health Region.The Trauma Air Rescue Society, a nonprofit organization, provides an ambulance service to all but the most remote areas of Alberta, and some adjoining areas of British Columbia.() Government File:Edmonton leg.jpg|thumb|240px|right|Albertas Legislative Building in Edmonton.The government of Alberta is organized as a parliamentary democracy with a unicameral legislature.  Its unicameral legislaturethe Legislative Assemblyconsists of eighty-three members.Locally municipal governments and school boards are elected and operate separately. Their boundaries do not necessarily coincide.  Municipalities where the same body act as both local government and school board are formally referred to as counties in Alberta.As Canadas of state, Elizabeth II is the head of state for the Government of Alberta. Her duties in Alberta are carried out by Lieutenant Governor Ethell.  Although the lieutenant governor is technically the most powerful person in Alberta, he is in reality a figurehead whose actions are restricted by custom and constitutional convention.  The government is therefore headed by the premier. The current premier is Redford who was elected as leader of the governing Progressive Conservatives on October 1, 2011.  Redford was sworn in as the 14th of Alberta on October 7, 2011.The Premier is a Member of the Legislative Assembly, and he draws all the members of his Cabinet from among the members of the Legislative Assembly.The City of Edmonton is the seat of the provincial governmentthe capital of Alberta.Albertas elections tend to yield results which are much more conservative than those of other Canadian provinces. Alberta has traditionally had three political parties, the Progressive Conservatives (Conservatives or Tories), the Liberals, and the social democratic New Democrats. A fourth party, the strongly conservative Social Credit Party, was a power in Alberta for many decades, but fell from the political map after the Progressive Conservatives came to power in 1971. Since that time, no other political party has governed Alberta. In fact, only four parties have governed Alberta: the Liberals, from 1905 to 1921; the Farmers of Alberta, from 1921 to 1935; the Social Credit Party, from 1935 to 1971, and the currently governing Progressive Conservative Party, from 1971 to the present.Alberta has had occasional surges in separatist sentiment. Even during the 1980s, when these feelings were at their strongest, there has never been enough interest in secession to initiate any major movements or referendums. There are several groups wishing to promote the independence of Alberta in some form currently active in the province.In the 2008 provincial election, held on March 3, 2008, the Progressive Conservative Party was re-elected as a majority government with 72 of 83 seats, the Liberal Party was elected as the Official Opposition with nine members, and two New Democratic Party members were elected.() Education File:SAIT Heart Building 2.jpg|thumb|right|220px|Heritage Hall at Polytechnic.As with any Canadian province, the Alberta Legislature has (almost) exclusive authority to make laws respecting education. Since 1905 the Legislature has used this capacity to continue the model of locally elected public and separate school boards which originated prior to 1905, as well as to create and/or regulate universities, colleges, technical institutions and other educational forms and institutions (public charter schools, private schools, home schooling). Elementary schools There are forty-two public school jurisdictions in Alberta, and seventeen operating separate school jurisdictions. Sixteen of the operating separate school jurisdictions have a Catholic electorate, and one (St. Albert) has a Protestant electorate. In addition, one Protestant separate school district, Glen Avon, survives as a ward of the St. Paul Education Region. The City of Lloydminster straddles the Alberta/Saskatchewan border, and both the public and separate school systems in that city are counted in the above numbers: both of them operate according to Saskatchewan law.For many years the provincial government has funded the greater part of the cost of providing K12 education. Prior to 1994 public and separate school boards in Alberta had the legislative authority to levy a local tax on property, as supplementary support for local education. In 1994 the government of the province eliminated this right for public school boards, but not for separate school boards. Since 1994 there has continued to be a tax on property in support of K12 education; the difference is that the mill rate is now set by the provincial government, the money is collected by the local municipal authority and remitted to the provincial government. The relevant legislation requires that all the money raised by this property tax must go to the support of K12 education provided by school boards. The provincial government pools the property tax funds from across the province and distributes them, according to a formula, to public and separate school jurisdictions and Francophone authorities.Public and separate school boards, schools, and schools all follow the Program of Studies and the curriculum approved by the provincial department of education (Alberta Education). Home schoolers may choose to follow the Program of Studies or develop their own Program of Studies.  Public and separate schools, charter schools, and approved private schools all employ teachers who are certificated by Alberta Education, they administer Provincial Achievement Tests and Diploma Examinations set by Alberta Education, and they may grant high school graduation certificates endorsed by Alberta Education. Universities File:Saint Josephs College University Of Alberta Edmonton Alberta Canada 02A.jpg|thumb|230px|right|St. Josephs College at the of Alberta.The of Alberta, established in Edmonton in 1908, is Albertas oldest and largest university. The of Calgary, once affiliated with the University of Alberta, gained its autonomy in 1966 and is now the second largest university in Alberta. There is also University, which focuses on distance learning, and the of Lethbridge, both of which are located in their title cities.In early September 2009, Royal University became Calgarys second public university, and in late September 2009, a similar move made MacEwan University Edmontons second public university. There are 15 colleges that receive direct public funding, along with two technical institutes, Alberta Institute of Technology and Alberta Institute of Technology.()There is also a large and active private sector of post-secondary institutions, mostly Christian Universities, bringing the total number of universities to twelve, plus a University in Calgary, the only location in Canada. Students may also receive government loans and grants while attending selected private institutions. There has been some controversy in recent years over the rising cost of post-secondary education for students (as opposed to taxpayers). In 2005, Premier Klein made a promise that he would freeze tuition and look into ways of reducing schooling costs.() So far, no plan has been released by the government of Alberta. Culture File:StampedeRodeo2002.JPG|200px|right|thumb|The Stampede.Summer brings many festivals to the province of Alberta, especially in Edmonton. The Fringe Festival is the worlds  second largest after Edinburghs. Both Calgary and Edmonton host a number of annual festivals and events including folk music festivals. With a large number of summer and winter events, Edmonton prides itself as being the Festival City. The citys heritage days festival sees the participation of over 70 ethnic groups. Edmontons Churchill Square is home to a large number of the festivals, including the large Taste of Edmonton & Works Art & Design Festival throughout the summer months.The City of Calgary is also famous for its Stampede, dubbed The Greatest Outdoor Show on Earth. The Stampede is Canadas biggest rodeo festival and features various races and competitions, such as roping and riding. In line with the western tradition of rodeo are the cultural artisans that reside and create unique Alberta western heritage crafts.The Centre hosts a range of festivals and other events including the international Mountain Film Festival. These cultural events in Alberta highlight the provinces cultural diversity. Most of the major cities have several performing theatre companies who entertain in venues as diverse as Edmontons Arts Barns and the Winspear Centre for Music. Both Calgary and Edmonton are home to Football League and Hockey League teams. Soccer, union and lacrosse are also played professionally in Alberta.PaleontologyFile:Pachyrhinosaurus skull.jpg|thumb|right|200px|Pachyrhinosaurus skull. Large quantities of this genus are preserved in the Formation.Alberta has one of the greatest diversities and abundances of Cretaceous dinosaur fossils in the world.( Taxa are represented by complete fossil skeletons, isolated material, microvertebrate remains, and even mass graves.( At least 38 dinosaur specimens are known from the province.( The Formation, Formation and Park Formations collectively comprise the Judith River Group and are the most thoroughly studied dinosaur bearing strata in Alberta.( The stratigraphy of the River Group has a confusing history due partly to the use of the Montana-Alberta border as an artificial division between equivalent strata.( The modern Judith River Group stratigraphy was not finalized until 1993 when Eberth and Hamblin divided the Oldman Formation in two to create the new Dinosaur Park Formation.( The resulting paleontological confusion was resolved by Currie who relocated old quarries dinosaurs had been found in and determined their distribution within the modern stratigraphic framework.(Dinosaur-bearing strata are distributed widely through-out Alberta.( The Provincial Park area contains outcrops of the Dinosaur Park Formation and Oldman Formation.( In the central and southern regions of Alberta are intermittent Formation outcrops.( In the Valley and Edmonton regions there are exposed Horseshoe Canyon facies. Other formations have been recorded as well, like the Milk River and Foremost Formations.( However, these latter two have a lower diversity of documented dinosaurs, primarily due to their lower total fossil quantity and neglect from collectors who are hindered by the isolation and scarcity of exposed outcrops.( Their dinosaur fossils are primarily teeth recovered from microvertebrate fossil sites.( Additional geologic formations that have produced only few fossils are the River Group and Mary River Formations of the southwest and the northwestern Formation.( The Wapiti Formations contains two Pachyrhinosaurus bone beds that break its general trend of low productivity, however.( The Formation represents strata deposited during a transgression.( Dinosaurs are known from this Formation, but represent specimens washed out to sea or reworked from older sediments.(Ryan, M. J., and Russell, A. P., 2001. Dinosaurs of Alberta (exclusive of  Aves): In: Mesozoic Vertebrate Life, edited by Tanke, D. H., and Carpenter,  K., Indiana University Press, pp. 279-297.) Friendship partners Alberta has relationships with several provinces, states, and other entities worldwide.(Alberta Twinning Relationships. Retrieved on 12 Aug 2011.)*  Jalisco, Mexico, Special Relationships*  Hokkaido, Japan, Special Relationships*  Gyeongsangnam-do, Korea, Special Relationships*  KhantyMansi, Russia, Special Relationships*  Yamalo-Nenets, Russia, Special Relationships*  Neuqun, Argentina, Economic MOUs*  Mpumalanga, Africa, Governance Projects*  Heilongjiang, Republic of China, Special Relationships*  Tyumen, Russia, Special Relationships*  Montana, States of America, Transboundary Partnerships*  Gangwon-do, Korea, Special RelationshipsSee also References Further reading * postscript  * postscript   * postscript  * postscript  * postscript   * postscript    External links * Government of Alberta website* * Provincial Archives of Alberta website* Travel Alberta* Alberta Encyclopedia* CBC Digital ArchivesStriking Oil in Alberta* CBC Digital ArchivesElecting Dynasties: Alberta Campaigns 1935 to 2001* CBC Digital ArchivesAlberta @ 100list af:Albertaang:Albertaar:arc:ast:Albertaaz:Albertazh-min-nan:Albertabe-x-old:bs:Albertabr:Albertabg:ca:Albertacs:Albertaco:Albertacy:Albertada:Albertade:Albertaet:Albertael:es:Albertaeo:Albertoeu:Albertafa:fr:Albertafy:Albertaga:Albertagv:Albertagd:Albertagl:Albertahy:hi:hr:Albertaio:Albertaid:Albertaos:(fylki)it:Albertahe:jv:Albertakl:Albertakn:pam:Albertaka:kw:Albertasw:Albertala:Albertalv:Albertalt:Albertalij:Alberta(tartomny)mk:mr:mn:nah:Albertanl:Albertaja:frr:Albertano:Albertann:Albertaoc:Albrtapnb:pms:Albertapl:Albertapt:Albertaro:Albertaru:sah:sq:Albertasimple:Albertask:Alberta(provinca)sr:sh:Albertafi:Albertasv:Albertatl:Albertata:th:tr:Albertauk:ur:ug:Albrtavi:Albertavo:Albertafiu-vro:Albertawar:Albertayi:bat-smg:Albertazh:
