<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>717</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>Alberta</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>


 Website  www.alberta.ca


Alberta  is a province of Canada. It had an estimated population of 3.7 million in 2010() making it the most populous of Canadas three prairie provinces. Alberta and its neighbour, Saskatchewan, were established as provinces on September 1, 1905.()

Alberta is located in Canada, bounded by the provinces of Columbia to the west and Saskatchewan to the east, the Territories to the north, and the state of Montana to the south. Alberta is one of three Canadian provinces and territories to border only a single U.S. state and is also one of only two provinces that are landlocked.

Edmonton, the city of Alberta, is located near the geographic centre of the province and is the primary supply and service hub for Canadas oil sands and other northern resource industries. Approximately  south of the capital is Calgary, Albertas largest city and a major distribution and transportation hub. According to recent population estimates, these two metropolitan areas have now both exceeded 1 million people.() Census agglomerations in the province include Lethbridge, Red Deer, Prairie, Hat, Wood Buffalo (includes McMurray), Lloydminster, Brooks, Okotoks, Camrose, Canmore, Cold Lake, and Wetaskiwin.(  Notable tourist destinations in the province include Canmore, Sylvan Lake, Drumheller, Banff, and Jasper.

Alberta is named after Princess Louise Caroline Alberta (18481939),() the fourth daughter of Victoria, the of Canada until 1901, and Prince Consort. Princess Louise was the wife of the Marquess of Lorne, General of Canada from 1878 to 1883. Lake Louise, the Village of Caroline, and Alberta were also named in honour of Princess Louise.

The current Premier of the province is Redford.

 Geography 



Alberta, with an area of () is the fourth largest province after Quebec, Ontario, and British Columbia. To the south, the province borders on the parallel north, separating it from the U.S. state of Montana, while on the north the parallel north divides it from the Territories. To the east the meridian west separates it from the province of Saskatchewan, while on the west its boundary with British Columbia follows the meridian west south from the Northwest Territories at 60N until it reaches the Divide at the Mountains, and from that point follows the line of peaks marking the Continental Divide in a generally southeasterly direction until it reaches the Montana border at 49N.

The province extends  north to south and  east to west at its maximum width. Its highest point is  at the summit of Mount Columbia in the Rocky Mountains along the southwest border, while its lowest point is  on the River in Buffalo National Park in the northeast.(

)

With the exception of the semi-arid steppe of the southeastern section, the province has adequate resources. There are numerous rivers and lakes used for swimming, fishing and a range of sports. There are three large lakes, Lake Claire () in Buffalo National Park, Slave Lake (), and Athabasca () which lies in both Alberta and Saskatchewan. The longest river in the province is the River which travels  from the Icefield in the Rocky Mountains to Lake Athabasca.(
) The largest river is the Peace River with an average flow of 2161 m3/s. The Peace River originates in the Rocky Mountains of northern British Columbia and flows through northern Alberta and into the River, a tributary of the River.

File:Moraine Lake 17092005.jpg|thumb|250px|right|Lake in National Park.
Albertas capital city, Edmonton, is located approximately in the geographic centre of the province. It is the most northerly major city in Canada, and serves as a gateway and hub for resource development in northern Canada. The region, with its proximity to Canadas largest fields, has most of western Canadas oil refinery capacity. Calgary is located approximately  south of Edmonton and  north of Montana, surrounded by extensive ranching country. Almost 75% of the provinces population lives in the Corridor.

Most of the northern half of the province is forest, while the Mountains along the southwestern boundary are largely forested (see Mountain forests and Columbia foothills forests). The southern quarter of the province is prairie, ranging from prairie in the southeastern corner to mixed grass prairie in an arc to the west and north of it. The central parkland region extending in a broad arc between the prairies and the forests, from Calgary, north to Edmonton, and then east to Lloydminster, contains the most fertile soil in the province and most of the population. Much of the unforested part of Alberta is given over either to grain or to farming, with farming more common in the north and centre, while ranching and agriculture predominate in the south.(

)

The Alberta badlands are located in southeastern Alberta, where the Deer River crosses the flat prairie and farmland, and features deep canyons and striking landforms. Provincial Park, near Alberta, showcases the badlands terrain, desert flora, and remnants from Albertas past when dinosaurs roamed the then lush landscape.

 Climate 
Alberta has a dry climate with warm summers and cold winters. The province is open to cold arctic weather systems from the north, which often produce extremely cold conditions in winter. As the fronts between the air masses shift north and south across Alberta, temperature can change rapidly. Arctic air masses in the winter produce extreme minimum temperatures varying from  in northern Alberta to  in southern Alberta. In the summer, continental air masses produce maximum temperatures from  in the mountains to  in southern Alberta.(

)

Alberta extends for over  from north to south; its climate, therefore, varies considerably. Average temperatures in January range from  in the south to  in the north, and in July from  in the south to  in the north.  The climate is also influenced by the presence of the Rocky Mountains to the southwest, which disrupt the flow of the prevailing westerly winds and cause them to drop most of their moisture on the western slopes of the mountain ranges before reaching the province, casting a shadow over much of Alberta. The northerly location and isolation from the weather systems of the Ocean cause Alberta to have a dry climate with little moderation from the ocean. Annual precipitation ranges from  in the southeast to  in the north, except in the foothills of the Rocky Mountains where rainfall can reach  annually.(

In the summer, the average daytime temperatures range from around  in the Rocky Mountain valleys and far north to  in the dry prairie of the southeast. The northern and western parts of the province experience higher rainfall and lower evaporation rates caused by cooler summer temperatures. The south and east-central portions are prone to drought-like conditions sometimes persisting for several years, although even these areas can receive heavy precipitation.
Alberta is a sunny province. Annual bright sunshine totals range between 1900 and 2500 hours per year. Northern Alberta receives about 18 hours of daylight in the summer.(

In southwestern Alberta, the cold winters are frequently interrupted by warm, dry winds blowing from the mountains, which can propel temperatures upward from frigid conditions to well above the freezing point in a very short period. During one chinook recorded at Creek, temperatures soared from  to  in one hour.(  The region around Lethbridge has the most chinooks, averaging 30 to 35 chinook days per year, while Calgary has a Christmas only 59% of the time as a result of these winds. 

Northern Alberta is mostly covered by boreal forest and has a climate. The agricultural area of southern Alberta have a semi-arid steppe climate because the annual precipitation is less than the water that evaporates or is used by plants. The southeastern corner of Alberta, part of the Triangle, experiences greater summer heat and lower rainfall than the rest of the province, and as a result suffers frequent yield problems and occasional severe droughts. Western Alberta is protected by the mountains and enjoys the mild temperatures brought by winter winds. Central and parts of northwestern Alberta in the Peace River region are largely aspen parkland, a biome transitional between prairie to the south and boreal forest to the north.

After Ontario, Alberta is the most likely region in Canada to experience tornadoes. Thunderstorms, some of them severe, are frequent in the summer, especially in central and southern Alberta. The region surrounding the Corridor is notable for having the highest frequency of hail in Canada, which is caused by lifting from the nearby Rocky Mountains, enhancing the updraft/downdraft cycle necessary for the formation of hail.



Image:Banff Trail 2.jpg|Winter climate at Banff Trail station in Calgary.
Image:DinosaurProvincialParkHoodoo.jpg|Hoodoos in Provincial Park.
Image:May 2011 Wildfires in Alberta, Canada.jpg|Satellite image of wildfires in Alberta.





 Ecology 
 Flora 
In central and northern Alberta the arrival of spring brings the prairie crocus anemone, the three flowered avens, bean, wild rose and other early flowers. The advancing summer introduces many flowers of the sunflower family, until in August the plains are one blaze of yellow and purple. The southern and east central parts of Alberta are covered by a short, nutritious grass, which dries up as summer lengthens, to be replaced by hardy perennials such as the prairie coneflower, fleabane, and sage. Both yellow and white clover fill the ditches with their beauty and aromatic scents.

The trees in the parkland region of the province grow in clumps and belts on the hillsides. These are largely deciduous, typically aspen, poplar, and willow. Many species of willow and other shrubs grow in virtually any terrain. On the north side of the North Saskatchewan River evergreen forests prevail for hundreds of thousands of square kilometres. Aspen poplar, poplar (or cottonwood), and birch are the primary large deciduous species. Conifers include pine, Rocky Mountain pine, pine, both white and black spruce, and the deciduous conifer tamarack.

 Fauna 
Image:Ovis canadensis 2.jpg|thumb|right|200px|The sheep is Albertas provincial animal
The four climatic regions (alpine, forest, parkland, and prairie) of Alberta are home to many different species of animals. The south and central prairie was the land of the bison, commonly known as buffalo, its grasses providing pasture and breeding ground for millions of buffalo. The buffalo population was decimated during early settlement, but since then buffalo have made a comeback, living on farms and in parks all over Alberta.

Alberta is home to many large carnivores. Among them are the grizzly and black bears, which are found in the mountains and wooded regions. Smaller carnivores of the canine and feline families include coyotes, wolves, fox, lynx, bobcat and lion (cougar).

Herbivorous animals are found throughout the province. Moose, deer, and deer are found in the wooded regions, and pronghorn can be found in the prairies of southern Alberta. sheep and goats live in the Mountains. Rabbits, porcupines, skunks, squirrels and many species of rodents and reptiles live in every corner of the province. Alberta is home to only one variety of snake, the prairie rattlesnake.

thumb|left|200px|Water birds in EdmontonCentral and northern Alberta and the region farther north is the nesting ground of many migratory birds. Vast numbers of ducks, geese, swans and pelicans arrive in Alberta every spring and nest on or near one of the hundreds of small lakes that dot northern Alberta. Eagles, hawks, owls and crows are plentiful, and a huge variety of smaller seed and insect-eating birds can be found. Alberta, like other temperate regions, is home to mosquitoes, flies, wasps, and bees. Rivers and lakes are populated with pike, walleye, whitefish, rainbow, speckled, and brown trout, and even sturgeon. Turtles are found in some water bodies in the southern part of the province. Frogs and salamanders are a few of the amphibians that make their homes in Alberta.

Alberta is the only province in Canadaas well as one of the few places in the worldthat is free of Norwegian rats.() Since the early 1950s, the government of Alberta has operated a rat-control program, which has been so successful that only isolated instances of wild rat sightings are reported, usually of rats arriving in the province aboard trucks or by rail. In 2006, Alberta Agriculture reports zero findings of wild rats; the only rat interceptions have been domesticated rats that have been seized from their owners. It is illegal for individual Albertans to own or keep Norwegian rats of any description; the animals can be kept in the province by only zoos, universities and colleges, and recognized research institutions. In 2009, several rats were
found and captured, in small pockets in Southern Alberta,() putting Albertas rat-free status in jeopardy.

 History 
File:Alexander Rutherford.jpg|right|thumb|150px|C. Rutherford, Albertas first premier


The first people in Alberta were Paleo-Indians who arrived in Alberta at least 10,000 years ago, toward the end of the ice age. They probably migrated from Siberia to Alaska on a land bridge across the Strait, and then may have moved down the east side of the Mountains through Alberta to settle the Americas. Alternatively they may have migrated down the coast of British Columbia and then moved inland.() Over time they differentiated into various Nations peoples, including the Indian tribes of southern Alberta such as those of the Confederacy and the Cree, who generally lived by hunting buffalo (bison), and the more northerly tribes such as the Cree and  Chipewyan who hunted, trapped, and fished for a living.()

After the British arrival in Canada, approximately half of the province of Alberta, south of the River drainage, became part of Land which consisted of all land drained by rivers flowing into Bay. This area was granted by II of England to the Bay Company (HBC) in 1670, and rival fur trading companies were not allowed to trade in it. After the arrival of Canadians in the west around 1731, they settled near fur trading posts, establishing communities such as Lac La Biche and Bonnyville. Fort La Jonquire was established near what is now Calgary in 1752.

The Athabasca River and the rivers north of it were not in HBC territory because they drained into the Ocean instead of Hudson Bay, and they were prime habitat for fur-bearing animals. The first explorer of the Athabasca region was Pond, who learned of the Portage, which allowed travel from southern  rivers into the rivers north of Ruperts Land.  Fur traders formed the West Company (NWC) of Montreal to compete with the HBC in 1779. The NWC occupied the northern part of Alberta territory. Peter Pond built Fort Athabasca on Lac la Biche in 1778. Roderick Mackenzie built Chipewyan on Lake Athabasca ten years later in 1788. His cousin, Sir Alexander Mackenzie, followed the Saskatchewan River to its northernmost point near Edmonton, then setting northward on foot, trekked to the Athabasca River, which he followed to Lake Athabasca. It was there he discovered the mighty outflow river which bears his namethe Riverwhich he followed to its outlet in the Ocean. Returning to Lake Athabasca, he followed the Peace River upstream, eventually reaching the Ocean, and so he became the first white man to cross the North American continent north of Mexico.()

The extreme southernmost portion of Alberta was part of the French (and Spanish) territory of Louisiana, sold to the United States in 1803; in 1818, the portion of Louisiana north of the Forty-Ninth Parallel was ceded to Great Britain.

Fur trade expanded in the north, but bloody battles occurred between the rival HBC and NWC, and in 1821 the British government forced them to merge to stop the hostilities. The amalgamated Hudsons Bay Company dominated trade in Alberta until 1870, when the newly formed Government purchased Ruperts Land. Northern Alberta was included in the Territory until 1870, when it and Ruperts land became Canadas Territories.

The district of Alberta was created as part of the North-West Territories in 1882. As settlement increased, local representatives to the North-West Legislative Assembly were added. After a long campaign for autonomy, in 1905 the district of Alberta was enlarged and given provincial status, with the election of Cameron Rutherford as the first premier.

 Demographics 


Alberta has enjoyed a relatively high rate of growth in recent years, mainly because of its burgeoning economy. Between 2003 and 2004, the province had high birthrates (on par with some larger provinces such as British Columbia), relatively high immigration, and a high rate of interprovincial migration when compared to other provinces.()

Approximately 81% of the population live in urban areas and only about 19% live in rural areas. The Calgary-Edmonton Corridor is the most urbanized area in the province and is one of the most densely populated areas of Canada.() Many of Albertas cities and towns have also experienced very high rates of growth in recent history. Over the past century, Albertas population rose from 73,022 in 1901 to 2,974,807 in 2001() and 3,290,350 according to the 2006 census.()


The 2006 census found that English, with 2,576,670 native speakers, was the most common mother tongue of Albertans, representing 79.99% of the provinces population. The next most common mother tongues were various languages with 97,275 native speakers (3.02%), followed by German with 84,505 native speakers (2.62%) and French with 61,225 (1.90%).()

Other mother tongues (in decreasing order) include: Punjabi, with 36,320 native speakers (1.13%); Tagalog, with 29,740 (0.92%); Ukrainian, with 29,455 (0.91%); Spanish, with 29,125 (0.90%); Polish, with 21,990 (0.68%); Arabic, with 20,495 (0.64%); Dutch, with 19,980 (0.62%); and Vietnamese, with 19,350 (0.60%). The most common aboriginal language is Cree 17,215 (0.53%). Other common  mother tongues include Italian with 13,095 speakers (0.41%); Urdu with 11,275 (0.35%); and Korean with 10,845 (0.33%); then Hindi 8,985 (0.28%); Persian 7,700 (0.24%); Portuguese 7,205 (0.22%); and Hungarian 6,770 (0.21%).(Figures shown are for the number of single language responses and the percentage of total single-language responses.)(

Alberta has considerable ethnic diversity. In line with the rest of Canada, many immigrants originated from England,  Scotland, Ireland and Wales, but large numbers also came from other parts of Europe, notably Germans, French, Ukrainians and Scandinavians.(
) According to Statistics Canada, Alberta is home to the second highest proportion (two percent) of Francophones in western Canada (after Manitoba). Despite this, relatively few Albertans claim French as their mother tongue. Many of Albertas French-speaking residents live in the central and northwestern regions of the province.

As reported in the 2001 census, the Chinese represented nearly four percent of Albertas population, and East Indians represented more than two percent. Both Edmonton and Calgary have historic Chinatowns, and Calgary has Canadas third largest Chinese community. The Chinese presence began with workers employed in the building of the Canadian Pacific Railway in the 1880s. Aboriginal Albertans make up approximately three percent of the population.

In the 2006 Canadian census, the most commonly reported ethnic origins among Albertans were: 885,825 English (27.2%); 679,705 German (20.9%); 667,405 Canadian (20.5%); 661,265 Scottish (20.3%); 539,160 Irish (16.6%); 388,210 French (11.9%); 332,180 Ukrainian (10.2%); 172,910 Dutch (5.3%); 170,935 Polish (5.2%); 169,355 American Indian (5.2%); 144,585 Norwegian (4.4%); and 137,600 Chinese (4.2%). (Each person could choose as many ethnicities as were applicable.)()

Amongst those of British origins, the Scots have had a particularly strong influence on place-names, with the names of many cities and towns including Calgary, Airdrie, Canmore, and Banff having Scottish origins.



Alberta is the third most diverse province in terms of minorities after British Columbia and Ontario with 13.9% of the population consisting of minorities.() Nearly one-fourth of the populations of Calgary and Edmonton belong to a visible minority group.()

Aboriginal Identity Peoples make up 5.8% of the population, about half of whom consist of American Indians and the other half are Metis. There are also small number of Inuit people in Alberta.() The number of Aboriginal Identity Peoples have been increasing at a rate greater than the population of Alberta.(

As of the 2001 Census the largest religious group was Roman Catholic, representing 25.7% of the population. Alberta had the second highest percentage of non-religious residents in Canada (after British Columbia) at 23.1% of the population. Of the remainder, 13.5% of the population identified themselves as belonging to the Church of Canada, while 5.9% were Anglican. Lutherans made up 4.8% of the population while Baptists comprised 2.5%.

The remainder belonged to a wide variety of different religious affiliations, none of which constituted more than 2% of the population. The Mormons of Alberta reside primarily in the extreme south of the province and made up 1.7% of the population. Alberta has a population of Hutterites, a communal Anabaptist sect similar to the Mennonites (Hutterites represented 0.4% of the population while Mennonites were 0.8%), and has a significant population of Seventh-day Adventists at 0.3%. Alberta is home to several Rite Churches as part of the legacy of Eastern European immigration, including the Catholic Eparchy of Edmonton, and the Orthodox Church of Canadas Western Diocese which is based in Edmonton.
()

Muslims, Sikhs, and Hindus live in Alberta. Muslims constituted 1.7% of the population, Sikhs 0.8% and Hindus 0.5%. Many of these are recent immigrants, but others have roots that go back to the first settlers of the prairies.( Canadas oldest mosque, the Mosque is located in Edmonton,() whereas the Canadas largest mosque, the Nur mosque is located in Calgary.() Jews constituted 0.4% of Albertas population. Most of Albertas 13,000 Jews live in Calgary (7,500) and Edmonton (5,000).(AM YisraelThe Jewish Communities of Canada)

 Municipalities 






;Largest metro areas and municipalities by population as of 2006



File:Edmonton Skyline Panorama.jpg|thumb|800px|center|Edmonton
File:Calgary panorama-2.jpg|thumb|800px|center|Calgary


 Economy 


Albertas economy is one of the strongest in Canada, supported by the burgeoning petroleum industry and to a lesser extent, agriculture and technology. The per capita GDP in 2007 was by far the highest of any province in Canada at C$74,825. This was 61% higher than the national average of C$46,441 and more than twice that of some of the Atlantic provinces. In 2006 the deviation from the national average was the largest for any province in Canadian history.() According to the 2006 census,() the median annual family income after taxes was $70,986 in Alberta (compared to $60,270 in Canada as a whole).

The Calgary-Edmonton Corridor is the most urbanized region in the province and one of the densest in Canada. The region covers a distance of roughly 400 kilometres north to south. In 2001, the population of the Calgary-Edmonton Corridor was 2.15 million (72% of Albertas population).() It is also one of the fastest growing regions in the country. A 2003 study by Bank Financial Group found the corridor to be the only Canadian urban centre to amass a U.S. level of wealth while maintaining a Canadian style of life, offering health care benefits. The study found that GDP per capita in the corridor was 10% above average U.S. metropolitan areas and 40% above other Canadian cities at that time.

The Institute states that Alberta also has very high levels of freedom and rates Alberta as the freest economy in Canada,() and the second freest economy amongst U.S. states and Canadian provinces.()

 Industry 
File:Syncrude mildred lake plant.jpg|thumb|right|250px|Mildred Lake mine site and plant at the Oil Sands.
Alberta is the largest producer of conventional crude oil, crude, gas and gas products in the country. Alberta is the worlds 2nd largest exporter of natural gas and the 4th largest producer.() Two of the largest producers of petrochemicals in America are located in central and north-central Alberta. In both Red Deer and Edmonton, world class polyethylene and vinyl manufacturers produce products shipped all over the world, and Edmontons oil refineries provide the raw materials for a large petrochemical industry to the east of Edmonton.

The oil sands have estimated oil reserves approximately equal to the oil reserves of the rest of the world, estimated to be 1.6 trillion barrels (254 km3). With the development of new extraction methods such as assisted gravity drainage, which was developed in Alberta, bitumen and synthetic crude oil can be produced at costs close to those of conventional crude. Many companies employ both conventional strip mining and non-conventional situ methods to extract the bitumen from the sands. With current technology and at current prices, about 315 billion barrels (50 km3) of bitumen are recoverable. McMurray, one of Canadas fastest growing  cities, has grown enormously in recent years because of the large corporations which have taken on the task of oil production. As of late 2006 there were over $100 billion in oil sands projects under construction or in the planning stages in northeastern Alberta.()

Another factor determining the viability of oil extraction from the sands is the price of oil. The price increases since 2003 have made it more than profitable to extract this oil, which in the past would give little profit or even a loss.

With concerted effort and support from the provincial government, several high-tech industries have found their birth in Alberta, notably patents related to interactive crystal display systems.(Interactive display systemUS Patent U.S. Patent No. 5,448,263; U.S. Patent for Touch Sensitive TechnologySMART Technologies) With a growing economy, Alberta has several financial institutions dealing with civil and private funds.

 Agriculture and forestry 

File:Warner Elevator Row.jpg|thumb|250px|right|The elevator row, the last surviving elevator row in Alberta, currently unprotected.
Agriculture has a significant position in the provinces economy. The province has over three million head of cattle,(Alberta Livestock InspectionsAugust 2006Alberta Government, Department of Agriculture) and Alberta beef has a healthy worldwide market. Nearly one half of all Canadian beef is produced in Alberta. Alberta is one of the prime producers of plains buffalo (bison) for the consumer market. Sheep for wool and mutton are also raised.

Wheat and canola are primary farm crops, with Alberta leading the provinces in spring wheat production; other grains are also prominent. Much of the farming is dryland farming, often with fallow seasons interspersed with cultivation. Continuous cropping (in which there is no fallow season) is gradually becoming a more common mode of production because of increased profits and a reduction of soil erosion. Across the province, the once common elevator is slowly being lost as rail lines are decreasing; farmers typically truck the grain to central points.

Alberta is the leading beekeeping province of Canada, with some beekeepers wintering hives indoors in specially designed barns in southern Alberta, then migrating north during the summer into the Peace River valley where the season is short but the working days are long for honeybees to produce honey from clover and fireweed. Hybrid canola also requires bee pollination, and some beekeepers service this need.

The vast northern forest reserves of softwood allow Alberta to produce large quantities of lumber, oriented strand board (OSB) and plywood, and several plants in northern Alberta supply North America and the Rim nations with bleached pulp and newsprint.

 Tourism 


File:Stephen Avenue.jpg|thumb|250px|right|Avenue, Calgary.
Alberta has been a tourist destination from the early days of the twentieth century, with attractions including outdoor locales for skiing, hiking and camping, shopping locales such as Edmonton Mall, Stampede, outdoor festivals, professional athletic events, international sporting competitions such as the Games and Games, as well as more eclectic attractions. There are also natural attractions like Island National Park, Buffalo National Park, and the Icefield.

According to Alberta Economic Development, Calgary and Edmonton both host over four million visitors annually. Banff, Jasper and the Rocky Mountains are visited by about three million people per year.() Alberta tourism relies heavily on Ontario tourists, as well as tourists from other parts of Canada, the States, and many international countries.

Albertas Rocky Mountains include well known tourist destinations Banff National Park and National Park. The two mountain parks are connected by the scenic Parkway. Banff is located  west of Calgary on Highway 1, and Jasper is located  west of Edmonton on Highway. Five of Canadas fourteen UNESCO heritage sites are located within the province: Rocky Mountain Parks, International Peace Park, Wood Buffalo National Park, Provincial Park and Buffalo Jump.

File:Lake Louise 17092005.jpg|thumb|250px|right|Lake Louise in the Rockies.
About 1.2 million people visit the of Stampede,() a celebration of Canadas own West and the cattle ranching industry. About 700,000 people enjoy Edmontons Ex (formerly Klondike Days).() Edmonton was the gateway to the only all-Canadian route to the Yukon gold fields, and the only route which did not require gold-seekers to travel the exhausting and dangerous Pass.

Another tourist destination that draws more than 650,000 visitors each year is the Drumheller Valley, located northeast of Calgary. Drumheller, Dinosaur Capital of The World, offers the Royal Tyrrell Museum of Palaeontology. Drumheller also had a rich mining history being one of Western Canadas largest coal producers during the war years. The Canadian Badlands has much to offer in the way of attractions, cultural events, celebrations, accommodations and service.

Located in east-central Alberta is Prairie Railway Excursions, a popular tourist attraction operated out of Stettler. It boasts one of the few operable steam trains in the world, offering trips through the rolling prairie scenery. Alberta Prairie Railway Excursions caters to tens of thousands of visitors every year.

Alberta is an important destination for tourists who love to ski and hike; Alberta boasts several world-class resorts such as Village, Lake Louise, Basin, Norquay and Nakiska. Hunters and fishermen from around the world are able to take home impressive trophies and tales from their experiences in Albertas wilderness.

 Taxation 
The provinces revenue comes mainly from royalties on non-renewable natural resources (30.4%), personal income taxes (22.3%), corporate and other taxes (19.6%), and grants from the federal government primarily for infrastructure projects (9.8%).() Albertans are the lowest-taxed people in Canada, and Alberta is the only province in Canada without a provincial tax (though residents are still subject to the federal sales tax, the Goods and Services Tax of 5%.) It is also the only Canadian province to have a single rate of taxation for personal income taxes which is 10% of taxable income.()

The Alberta tax system maintains a progressive character by allowing residents to earn $16,161 before becoming subject to provincial taxation in addition to a variety of tax deductions for persons with disabilities, students, and the aged.() Albertas municipalities and school jurisdictions have their own governments which (usually) work in co-operation with the provincial government.

Alberta also privatized alcohol distribution.  The privatization increased outlets from 304 stores to 1,726; 1,300 jobs to 4,000 jobs; and 3,325 products to 16,495 products.() Tax revenue also increased from $400 million to $700 million.

 Transportation 


File:DavidThompsonHighway.JPG|right|thumb|220px|David Thompson Highway outside of National Park.
Alberta has over  of highways and roads, of which nearly  are paved. The main north-south corridor is Highway 2, which begins south of Cardston at the Carway border crossing and is part of the Corridor. Highway 4, which effectively extends 15 into Alberta and is the busiest U.S. gateway to the province, begins at the Coutts border crossing and ends at Lethbridge. Highway 3 joins Lethbridge to Fort Macleod and links Highway 4 to Highway 2. Highway 2 travels northward through Fort Macleod, Calgary, Red Deer, and Edmonton.

North of Edmonton, the highway continues to Athabasca, then northwesterly along the south shore of Slave Lake into High Prairie, north to Peace River, west to Fairview and finally south to Prairie, where it ends at an interchange with Highway 43. The section of Highway 2 between Calgary and Edmonton has been named the Elizabeth II Highway to commemorate the visit of the monarch in 2005.  Highway 2 is supplemented by two more highways that run parallel to it: Highway 22, west of Highway 2, known as Cowboy Trail, and Highway 21, east of Highway 2. Highway 43 travels northwest into Grande Prairie and the River Country; Highway 63 travels northeast to McMurray, the location of the Athabasca Oil Sands.

Alberta has two main east-west corridors. The southern corridor, part of the Highway system, enters the province near Medicine Hat, runs westward through Calgary, and leaves Alberta through Banff National Park. The northern corridor, also part of the Trans-Canada network and known as the Highway (Highway 16), runs west from Lloydminster in eastern Alberta, through Edmonton and National Park into Columbia. One of the most scenic drives is along the Parkway, which runs for  between Jasper and Lake Louise, with mountain ranges and glaciers on either side of its entire length.

Another major corridor through central Alberta is Highway 11 (also known as the David Thompson Highway), which runs east from the Saskatchewan River Crossing in Banff National Park through Mountain House and Red Deer, connecting with Highway 12  west of Stettler. The highway connects many of the smaller towns in central Alberta with Calgary and Edmonton, as it crosses Highway 2 just west of Red Deer.

Urban stretches of Albertas major highways and freeways are often called trails. For example, Highway 2, the main north-south highway in the province, is called Trail as it passes through Calgary but becomes Trail (for southbound traffic) and Boulevard (for northbound traffic) as it enters Edmonton and then turns into St. Albert Trail as it leaves Edmonton for the City of St. Albert. Calgary, in particular, has a tradition of calling its largest urban expressways trails and naming many of them after prominent Nations individuals and tribes, such as Trail, Deerfoot Trail, and Trail.

Calgary, Edmonton, Red Deer, Medicine Hat, and Lethbridge have substantial transit systems. In addition to buses, Calgary and Edmonton operate rail transit (LRT) systems. LRT, which is underground in the downtown core and on the surface outside of it, was the first of the modern generation of light rail systems to be built in North America, while the Calgary C-Train has one of the highest number of daily riders of any LRT system in North America.

Alberta is well-connected by air, with airports in both Calgary and Edmonton. International Airport and International Airport are the fourth and fifth busiest in Canada respectively. Calgarys airport is a hub for WestJet Airlines and a regional hub for Canada. Calgarys airport primarily serves the Canadian prairie provinces (Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba) for connecting flights to British Columbia, eastern Canada, 15 major US centres, nine European airports, one Asian airport and four destinations in Mexico and the Caribbean.()  Edmontons airport acts as a hub for the Canadian north and has connections to all major Canadian airports as well as 10 major US airports, 3 European airports and 6 Mexican and Caribbean airports.()

There are over  of operating mainline railway, and many tourists see Alberta aboard Rail or Mountaineer. The Pacific Railway and National Railway companies operate railway freight across the province.

 Health care 

File:Alberta Childrens Hospital 3+4.jpg|thumb|220px|right|Childrens Hospital

As with all Canadian provinces, Alberta provides for all citizens and residents through a funded health care system. Alberta became Canadas second province (after Saskatchewan) to adopt a Douglas-style program in 1950, a precursor to the modern medicare system.

Albertas health care budget is currently $13.2 billion during the 20082009 fiscal year (approximately 36% of all government spending), making it the best funded health care system per-capita in Canada. Every hour more than $1.5 million is spent on health care in the province.()

File:University Hospital Complex University Of Alberta Edmonton Alberta Canada 02A.jpg|thumb|220px|left|of Alberta Hospital complex.
A highly educated population and burgeoning economy have made Alberta a national leader in health education, research, and resources. Many notable facilities include the Medical Centre, the Lougheed Centre, General Hospital, Childrens Hospital, Grace Womens Health Centre, The University of Calgary Medical Centre (UCMC), Baker Cancer Centre and Cardiovascular Institute of Alberta, in Calgary; In Edmonton, the of Alberta Hospital,  the Royal Alexandra Hospital, the Alberta Heart Institute, the Lois Hole Hospital for Women, the Childrens Hospital, the Alberta Diabetes Institute, the Cancer Institute, and the Rexall Centre for Pharmacy and Health Research in Edmonton. Currently under construction in Edmonton is the new $909 million Clinic, which will provide a similar research, education, and care environment as the Clinic in the States.()

Care in Alberta is administered by the unified Alberta Health Services Board. Prior to July 1, 2008, Alberta was divided into nine health regions: Regional Health Authority: Health Region, Health (Edmonton), Health, Thompson Regional Health Authority, Central Health, Lights Health Region, Health Region and Country Health Region.

The Trauma Air Rescue Society, a nonprofit organization, provides an ambulance service to all but the most remote areas of Alberta, and some adjoining areas of British Columbia.()

 Government 


File:Edmonton leg.jpg|thumb|240px|right|Albertas Legislative Building in Edmonton.
The government of Alberta is organized as a parliamentary democracy with a unicameral legislature.  Its unicameral legislaturethe Legislative Assemblyconsists of eighty-three members.

Locally municipal governments and school boards are elected and operate separately. Their boundaries do not necessarily coincide.  Municipalities where the same body act as both local government and school board are formally referred to as counties in Alberta.

As Canadas of state, Elizabeth II is the head of state for the Government of Alberta. Her duties in Alberta are carried out by Lieutenant Governor Ethell.  Although the lieutenant governor is technically the most powerful person in Alberta, he is in reality a figurehead whose actions are restricted by custom and constitutional convention.  The government is therefore headed by the premier. The current premier is Redford who was elected as leader of the governing Progressive Conservatives on October 1, 2011.  Redford was sworn in as the 14th of Alberta on October 7, 2011.

The Premier is a Member of the Legislative Assembly, and he draws all the members of his Cabinet from among the members of the Legislative Assembly.

The City of Edmonton is the seat of the provincial governmentthe capital of Alberta.

Albertas elections tend to yield results which are much more conservative than those of other Canadian provinces. Alberta has traditionally had three political parties, the Progressive Conservatives (Conservatives or Tories), the Liberals, and the social democratic New Democrats. A fourth party, the strongly conservative Social Credit Party, was a power in Alberta for many decades, but fell from the political map after the Progressive Conservatives came to power in 1971. Since that time, no other political party has governed Alberta. In fact, only four parties have governed Alberta: the Liberals, from 1905 to 1921; the Farmers of Alberta, from 1921 to 1935; the Social Credit Party, from 1935 to 1971, and the currently governing Progressive Conservative Party, from 1971 to the present.

Alberta has had occasional surges in separatist sentiment. Even during the 1980s, when these feelings were at their strongest, there has never been enough interest in secession to initiate any major movements or referendums. There are several groups wishing to promote the independence of Alberta in some form currently active in the province.

In the 2008 provincial election, held on March 3, 2008, the Progressive Conservative Party was re-elected as a majority government with 72 of 83 seats, the Liberal Party was elected as the Official Opposition with nine members, and two New Democratic Party members were elected.()

 Education 

File:SAIT Heart Building 2.jpg|thumb|right|220px|Heritage Hall at Polytechnic.
As with any Canadian province, the Alberta Legislature has (almost) exclusive authority to make laws respecting education. Since 1905 the Legislature has used this capacity to continue the model of locally elected public and separate school boards which originated prior to 1905, as well as to create and/or regulate universities, colleges, technical institutions and other educational forms and institutions (public charter schools, private schools, home schooling).

 Elementary schools 
There are forty-two public school jurisdictions in Alberta, and seventeen operating separate school jurisdictions. Sixteen of the operating separate school jurisdictions have a Catholic electorate, and one (St. Albert) has a Protestant electorate. In addition, one Protestant separate school district, Glen Avon, survives as a ward of the St. Paul Education Region. The City of Lloydminster straddles the Alberta/Saskatchewan border, and both the public and separate school systems in that city are counted in the above numbers: both of them operate according to Saskatchewan law.

For many years the provincial government has funded the greater part of the cost of providing K12 education. Prior to 1994 public and separate school boards in Alberta had the legislative authority to levy a local tax on property, as supplementary support for local education. In 1994 the government of the province eliminated this right for public school boards, but not for separate school boards. Since 1994 there has continued to be a tax on property in support of K12 education; the difference is that the mill rate is now set by the provincial government, the money is collected by the local municipal authority and remitted to the provincial government. The relevant legislation requires that all the money raised by this property tax must go to the support of K12 education provided by school boards. The provincial government pools the property tax funds from across the province and distributes them, according to a formula, to public and separate school jurisdictions and Francophone authorities.

Public and separate school boards, schools, and schools all follow the Program of Studies and the curriculum approved by the provincial department of education (Alberta Education). Home schoolers may choose to follow the Program of Studies or develop their own Program of Studies.  Public and separate schools, charter schools, and approved private schools all employ teachers who are certificated by Alberta Education, they administer Provincial Achievement Tests and Diploma Examinations set by Alberta Education, and they may grant high school graduation certificates endorsed by Alberta Education.

 Universities 

File:Saint Josephs College University Of Alberta Edmonton Alberta Canada 02A.jpg|thumb|230px|right|St. Josephs College at the of Alberta.

The of Alberta, established in Edmonton in 1908, is Albertas oldest and largest university. The of Calgary, once affiliated with the University of Alberta, gained its autonomy in 1966 and is now the second largest university in Alberta. There is also University, which focuses on distance learning, and the of Lethbridge, both of which are located in their title cities.

In early September 2009, Royal University became Calgarys second public university, and in late September 2009, a similar move made MacEwan University Edmontons second public university. There are 15 colleges that receive direct public funding, along with two technical institutes, Alberta Institute of Technology and Alberta Institute of Technology.()

There is also a large and active private sector of post-secondary institutions, mostly Christian Universities, bringing the total number of universities to twelve, plus a University in Calgary, the only location in Canada. Students may also receive government loans and grants while attending selected private institutions. There has been some controversy in recent years over the rising cost of post-secondary education for students (as opposed to taxpayers). In 2005, Premier Klein made a promise that he would freeze tuition and look into ways of reducing schooling costs.() So far, no plan has been released by the government of Alberta.

 Culture 


File:StampedeRodeo2002.JPG|200px|right|thumb|The Stampede.
Summer brings many festivals to the province of Alberta, especially in Edmonton. The Fringe Festival is the worlds  second largest after Edinburghs. Both Calgary and Edmonton host a number of annual festivals and events including folk music festivals. With a large number of summer and winter events, Edmonton prides itself as being the Festival City. The citys heritage days festival sees the participation of over 70 ethnic groups. Edmontons Churchill Square is home to a large number of the festivals, including the large Taste of Edmonton & Works Art & Design Festival throughout the summer months.


The City of Calgary is also famous for its Stampede, dubbed The Greatest Outdoor Show on Earth. The Stampede is Canadas biggest rodeo festival and features various races and competitions, such as roping and riding. In line with the western tradition of rodeo are the cultural artisans that reside and create unique Alberta western heritage crafts.

The Centre hosts a range of festivals and other events including the international Mountain Film Festival. These cultural events in Alberta highlight the provinces cultural diversity. Most of the major cities have several performing theatre companies who entertain in venues as diverse as Edmontons Arts Barns and the Winspear Centre for Music. Both Calgary and Edmonton are home to Football League and Hockey League teams. Soccer, union and lacrosse are also played professionally in Alberta.

Paleontology
File:Pachyrhinosaurus skull.jpg|thumb|right|200px|Pachyrhinosaurus skull. Large quantities of this genus are preserved in the Formation.
Alberta has one of the greatest diversities and abundances of Cretaceous dinosaur fossils in the world.( Taxa are represented by complete fossil skeletons, isolated material, microvertebrate remains, and even mass graves.( At least 38 dinosaur specimens are known from the province.( The Formation, Formation and Park Formations collectively comprise the Judith River Group and are the most thoroughly studied dinosaur bearing strata in Alberta.( The stratigraphy of the River Group has a confusing history due partly to the use of the Montana-Alberta border as an artificial division between equivalent strata.( The modern Judith River Group stratigraphy was not finalized until 1993 when Eberth and Hamblin divided the Oldman Formation in two to create the new Dinosaur Park Formation.( The resulting paleontological confusion was resolved by Currie who relocated old quarries dinosaurs had been found in and determined their distribution within the modern stratigraphic framework.(

Dinosaur-bearing strata are distributed widely through-out Alberta.( The Provincial Park area contains outcrops of the Dinosaur Park Formation and Oldman Formation.( In the central and southern regions of Alberta are intermittent Formation outcrops.( In the Valley and Edmonton regions there are exposed Horseshoe Canyon facies. Other formations have been recorded as well, like the Milk River and Foremost Formations.( However, these latter two have a lower diversity of documented dinosaurs, primarily due to their lower total fossil quantity and neglect from collectors who are hindered by the isolation and scarcity of exposed outcrops.( Their dinosaur fossils are primarily teeth recovered from microvertebrate fossil sites.( Additional geologic formations that have produced only few fossils are the River Group and Mary River Formations of the southwest and the northwestern Formation.( The Wapiti Formations contains two Pachyrhinosaurus bone beds that break its general trend of low productivity, however.( The Formation represents strata deposited during a transgression.( Dinosaurs are known from this Formation, but represent specimens washed out to sea or reworked from older sediments.(Ryan, M. J., and Russell, A. P., 2001. Dinosaurs of Alberta (exclusive of  Aves): In: Mesozoic Vertebrate Life, edited by Tanke, D. H., and Carpenter,  K., Indiana University Press, pp. 279-297.)

 Friendship partners 

Alberta has relationships with several provinces, states, and other entities worldwide.(Alberta Twinning Relationships. Retrieved on 12 Aug 2011.)
*  Jalisco, Mexico, Special Relationships
*  Hokkaido, Japan, Special Relationships
*  Gyeongsangnam-do, Korea, Special Relationships
*  KhantyMansi, Russia, Special Relationships
*  Yamalo-Nenets, Russia, Special Relationships
*  Neuqun, Argentina, Economic MOUs
*  Mpumalanga, Africa, Governance Projects
*  Heilongjiang, Republic of China, Special Relationships
*  Tyumen, Russia, Special Relationships
*  Montana, States of America, Transboundary Partnerships
*  Gangwon-do, Korea, Special Relationships

See also



 References 


Further reading 

* postscript  
* postscript   
* postscript  
* postscript  
* postscript   
* postscript   


 External links 

* Government of Alberta website
* 
* Provincial Archives of Alberta website
* Travel Alberta
* Alberta Encyclopedia
* CBC Digital ArchivesStriking Oil in Alberta
* CBC Digital ArchivesElecting Dynasties: Alberta Campaigns 1935 to 2001
* CBC Digital ArchivesAlberta @ 100


list 










af:Alberta
ang:Alberta
ar:
arc:
ast:Alberta
az:Alberta
zh-min-nan:Alberta

be-x-old:
bs:Alberta
br:Alberta
bg:
ca:Alberta
cs:Alberta
co:Alberta
cy:Alberta
da:Alberta
de:Alberta
et:Alberta
el:
es:Alberta
eo:Alberto
eu:Alberta
fa:
fr:Alberta
fy:Alberta
ga:Alberta
gv:Alberta
gd:Alberta
gl:Alberta

hy:
hi:
hr:Alberta
io:Alberta
id:Alberta
os:
(fylki)
it:Alberta
he:
jv:Alberta
kl:Alberta
kn:
pam:Alberta
ka:
kw:Alberta
sw:Alberta
la:Alberta
lv:Alberta
lt:Alberta
lij:Alberta
(tartomny)
mk:
mr:
mn:
nah:Alberta
nl:Alberta
ja:
frr:Alberta
no:Alberta
nn:Alberta
oc:Albrta
pnb:
pms:Alberta
pl:Alberta
pt:Alberta
ro:Alberta
ru:
sah:
sq:Alberta
simple:Alberta
sk:Alberta
(provinca)
sr:
sh:Alberta
fi:Alberta
sv:Alberta
tl:Alberta
ta:
th:
tr:Alberta
uk:
ur:
ug:Albrta
vi:Alberta
vo:Alberta
fiu-vro:Alberta
war:Alberta
yi:
bat-smg:Alberta
zh:</eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>737</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>Afghanistan</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>
footnote1


Afghanistan  (Persian/Pashto: , Afnistn), officially the Republic of Afghanistan, is a landlocked country in South and Asia.(( With a population of about 28 million, it has an area of 647,500 km, making it the 42nd most populous and 41st largest nation in the world. It is bordered by Pakistan in the southeast, Iran in the west, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan in the north, and the Republic of China in the far northeast. The territory that now forms Afghanistan has been an ancient focal point of the Road and migration. Archaeologists have found evidence of human habitation from as far back as 50,000 BC.() Urban civilization may have begun in the area as early as 3,000 to 2,000 BC.()

The country sits at an important geostrategic location that connects the East with Central Asia and the subcontinent,() which has been home to various peoples through the ages.() The land has witnessed many military conquests since antiquity, notably by the Great, Maurya, and Khan.(( It has also served as a source from which local dynasties such as the Greco-Bactrians, Kushans, Saffarids, Ghaznavids, Ghorids, Timurids, Mughals and many others have established empires of their own.()

The history of modern Afghanistan begins in 1709 with the rise of the Pashtuns, when the dynasty was established in Kandahar followed by Shah Durranis rise to power in 1747.()()() The capital of Afghanistan was shifted in 1776 from Kandahar to Kabul and part of the Afghan Empire was ceded to neighboring empires by 1893. In the late 19th century, Afghanistan became a state in the Great Game between the British and Russian empires.() On August 19, 1919, following the third Anglo-Afghan war and the signing of the of Rawalpindi, the nation regained control over its policy from the British.

After the 1978 Marxist revolution, the Union began a 10 year war in which hundreds of thousands of Afghan civilians were killed. This was followed by the civil war (1992-1996), the rise and fall of the extremist Taliban government and the 2001-present war. In December 2001, the Nations Security Council authorized the creation of the Security Assistance Force (ISAF) to help maintain security in Afghanistan and assist the Karzai administration.() While NATO and other countries are rebuilding war-torn Afghanistan, terrorist groups such as the Talibans Shura and the network with alleged support and guidance from Pakistans powerful Intelligence (ISI) spy network are actively involved in a nationwide insurgency(, which includes countless assassinations and attacks. According to the Nations, the insurgents were responsible for 75% of civilian casualties in 2010 and 80% in 2011.((

Etymology

The name Afghnistn (, )(Cowan, William and Jaromira Rakuan. Source Book for Linguistics. 3rd ed. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 1998.) means Land of the Afghans(), which originates from the ethnonym Afghan. The first part of the name Afghan designates the people since ancient times, the founders and the largest ethnic group of Afghanistan.() This name is mentioned in the form of Abgan in the 3rd century CE() and as Avagana or Afghana in the 6th century CE.( A people called the Afghans are mentioned several times in a 10th century geography book, al-alam, particularly where a reference is made to a village.Saul, a pleasant village on a mountain. In it live Afghans.() Al-Biruni referred to them in the 11th century as various tribes living on the western frontier mountains of the River, which would be the Mountains.() Battuta, a famous Moroccan scholar visiting the region in 1333, writes: We travelled on to Kabul, formerly a vast town, the site of which is now occupied by a village inhabited by a tribe of Persians called Afghans. They hold mountains and defiles and possess considerable strength, and are mostly highwaymen. Their principle mountain is called Kuh Sulayman.(
File:Afghan royal soldiers of the Durrani Empire.jpg|140px|left|thumb|Afghan soldiers of the Empire. The name Afghaunistan is written on this 1847 Lithograph by James Rattray.

One prominent 16th century Persian scholar explains extensively about the Afghans. For example, he writes:


It is widely accepted that the terms Pashtun and Afghan are synonyms. In the writings of the 17th-century Pashto poet Khan Khattak it is mentioned:

The last part of the name, -stn is a suffix for place, prominent in many languages of the region. The name Afghanistan is described by the 16th century Mughal Emperor Babur in his memoirs as well as by the later Persian scholar Firishta and Baburs descendants, referring to the traditional ethnic Afghan (Pashtun) territories between the Kush mountains and the River.() In the early 19th century, Afghan politicians decided to adopt the name Afghanistan for the entire Afghan Empire after its English translation had already appeared in various treaties with Qajarid Persia and British India.(E. Huntington, The Anglo-Russian Agreement as to Tibet, Afghanistan, and Persia, Bulletin of the American Geographical Society, Vol. 39, No. 11 (1907).) In 1857, in his review of J.W. Kayes The Afghan War, Engels describes Afghanistan as:


The Afghan kingdom was sometimes refered to as the Kingdom of Kabul, as mentioned by the British statesman and historian Elphinstone.(Elphinstone, M., Account of the Kingdom of Cabul and its Dependencies in Persia and India, London 1815; published by Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme & Brown.) Afghanistan was officially recognized as a state by the international community after the signing of the 1919 of Rawalpindi.(M. Ali, Afghanistan: The War of Independence, 1919, Kabul s.n., 1960.)(Afghanistans Constitution of 1923 under King Amanullah Khan (English translation).)

Geography


A landlocked mountainous country with plains in the north and southwest, Afghanistan is described as being located within Asia()()(BBC: Afghanistan country profile; Britannica: Afghanistan; Center for South Asia Outreach; World Bank; U.S. maps; Syracuse University.) or Asia.() It is part of the Middle East world, which lies between latitudes 29 and 39 N, and longitudes 60 and 75 E. The countrys highest point is Nowshak, at 7,485 m (24,557 ft) above sea level. It has a continental climate with very harsh winters in the central highlands, the glaciated northeast (around Nuristan) and the Corridor, where the average temperature in January is below , and hot summers in the low-lying areas of the Basin of the southwest, the Jalalabad basin in the east, and the Turkistan plains along the River in the north, where temperatures average over  in July.
File:Landscape in Paktia Province.jpg|thumb|left|Snow-covered mountains of Afghanistan

Despite having numerous rivers and reservoirs, large parts of the country are dry. The endorheic Sistan Basin is one of the driest regions in the world.() Afghanistan does not face water shortages because it receives plenty of snow during winter, especially in the Kush and Mountains, and the melting snow in the spring time enters the rivers, lakes, and streams. However, most of the countrys water (approx. 70%) flows into neighboring countries of Iran, Pakistan, Turkmenistan, and others or end up at dry deserts. The state needs more than $2 billion to rehabilitate its irrigation systems so that the water is properly managed.()

At , Afghanistan is the worlds 41st largest country (before France and after Burma). It is about the size of Texas in the United States. It borders Pakistan in the east and south, Iran in the west, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Tajikistan in the north, and China in the far east. The country is sometimes subjected to earthquakes, mainly in the northeastern Hindu Kush mountain range. Some 125 villages were damaged and over 4,000 people killed by two earthquakes in 1998. 

The countrys natural resources include: coal, copper, ore, lithium, uranium, earth elements, chromite, gold, zinc, talc, barites, sulfur, lead, marble, precious and stones, gas, and petroleum among other things.((( It was revealed recently that the country has about $13 trillion worth of lithium and other rare earth elements.()()((Afghanistans Buried Riches. Sarah Simpson. Scientific American, October 2011, pp. 42-49.)

History


Excavations of prehistoric sites by Louis Dupree and others suggest that humans were living in what is now Afghanistan at least 50,000 years ago, and that farming communities in the area were among the earliest in the world.((John Ford Shroder, University of Nebraska. Archived October 31, 2009.)(Nancy H. Dupree (1973): An Historical Guide To Afghanistan, Chapter 3 Sites in Perspective.) An important site of early historical activities, many say that Afghanistan compares to Egypt in terms of the historical value of its archaeological sites.() 

Afghanistan is at a unique nexus point where numerous civilizations have interacted and often fought. It has been home to various peoples through the ages, among them the Iranian peoples who established the dominant role of languages in the region. At multiple points, the land has been incorporated within large regional empires, among them the Empire, the Macedonian Empire, the Indian Maurya Empire, the Islamic Empire and the Sassanid Empire. 

Many kingdoms have also risen to power in what is now Afghanistan, such as the Greco-Bactrians, Kushans, Hephthalites, Shahis, Saffarids, Samanids, Ghaznavids, Ghurids, Kartids, Timurids, Mughals, and finally the Hotaki and Durrani dynasties that marked the political origins of the modern state of Afghanistan.

Pre-Islamic period

Archaeological exploration done in the 20th century suggests that the geographical area of Afghanistan has been closely connected by the culture of and trade with neighboring regions to the east, west, and north. Artifacts typical of the Paleolithic, Mesolithic, Neolithic, Bronze, and ages have been found in Afghanistan.(Library of Congress Country Studies on Afghanistan, Pre-Islamic Period, by Craig Baxter (1997).) Urban civilization may have begun as early as 3000 BCE, and the early city of Mundigak (near Kandahar in the south of the country) may have been a colony of the nearby Valley Civilization.( 

After 2000 BCE, successive waves of semi-nomadic people from Central Asia moved south into the boundaries of modern Afghanistan, among them were many Indo-European-speaking Indo-Iranians.( These tribes later migrated further south to India, west to what is now Iran, and towards Europe via the area north of the Caspian.(Bryant, Edwin F. (2001) The quest for the origins of Vedic culture: the Indo-Aryan migration debate Oxford University Press, Oxford, England, ISBN 0-19-513777-9.) The region was called Ariana.((Afghanistan: ancient Ariana (1950), Information Bureau, London, p3.)(M. Witzel, The Vdvda list obviously was composed or redacted by someone who regarded Afghanistan and the lands surrounding it as the home of all Indo-Iranians (airiia), that is of all (eastern) Iranians, with Airiianem Vajah as their center. page 48, The Home Of The Aryans, Festschrift J. Narten  Mnchener Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft, Beihefte NF 19, Dettelbach: J.H. Rll 2000, 283338. Also published online, at University (LINK))
File:AsokaKandahar.jpg|thumb|left|Bilingual (Greek and Aramaic) edict by Emperor Ashoka  from the century BC was discovered in the southern city of Kandahar.

The ancient Zoroastrianism religion is believed by some to have originated in what is now Afghanistan between 1800 and 800 BCE, as its founder Zoroaster is thought to have lived and died in Balkh.(Library of Congress Country Studies on Afghanistan, Achaemenid Rule, ca. 550-331 B.C.)(The history of Afghanistan, Ghandara.com website.)(Afghanistan: Achaemenid dynasty rule, Ancient Classical History, about.com.) Ancient Eastern Iranian languages may have been spoken in the region around the time of the rise of Zoroastrianism. By the middle of the 6th century BCE, the Achaemenid Persian Empire overthrew the Medes and incorporated the region (known as Arachosia, Aria, and Bactria in Greek) within its boundaries. An inscription on the tombstone of King I of Persia mentions the Kabul Valley in a list of the 29 countries he had conquered.(Nancy H. Dupree, An Historical Guide to Kabul)

the Great and his Macedonian army arrived in the area of Afghanistan in 330 BCE after defeating III of Persia a year earlier in the of Gaugamela.( Following Alexanders brief occupation, the successor state of the Empire controlled the area until 305 BCE when they gave much of it to the Indian Empire as part of an alliance treaty.64 BC  24 AD The Mauryans brought Buddhism from India and controlled the area south of the Hindu Kush until about 185 BCE when they were overthrown.( Their decline began 60 years after Ashokas rule ended, leading to the Hellenistic reconquest of the region by the Greco-Bactrians. Much of it soon broke away from the Greco-Bactrians and became part of the Indo-Greek Kingdom. The Indo-Greeks had been defeated and expelled by the Indo-Scythians in the late 2nd century BCE.

During the 1st century BCE, the Empire subjugated the region, but lost it to their Indo-Parthian vassals. In the mid to late 1st century CE the vast Empire, centered in modern Afghanistan, became great patrons of Buddhist culture. The Kushans were defeated by the Sassanids in the 3rd century CE. Although various rulers calling themselves Kushanshas (generally known as the Indo-Sassanids) continued to rule at least parts of the region, they were probably more or less subject to the Sassanids.(Dani, A. H. and B. A. Litvinsky. The Kushano-Sasanian Kingdom. In: History of civilizations of Central Asia, Volume III. The crossroads of civilizations: A.D. 250 to 750. Litvinsky, B. A., ed., 1996. Paris: UNESCO Publishing, pp. 103118. ISBN 92-3-103211-9.) 

The late Kushans were followed by the Kidarite Huns(Zeimal, E. V. The Kidarite Kingdom in Central Asia. In: History of civilizations of Central Asia, Volume III. The crossroads of civilizations: A.D. 250 to 750. Litvinsky, B. A., ed., 1996, Paris: UNESCO Publishing, pp. 119133. ISBN 92-3-103211-9.) who, in turn, were replaced by the short-lived but powerful Hephthalites, as rulers in the first half of the 5th century.(Litvinsky, B. A. The Hephthalite Empire. In: History of civilizations of Central Asia, Volume III. The crossroads of civilizations: A.D. 250 to 750. Litvinsky, B. A., ed., 1996, Paris: UNESCO Publishing, pp. 135162. ISBN 92-3-103211-9.) The Hephthalites were defeated by I in CE 557, who re-established Sassanid power in Persia. However, in the 6th century CE, the successors to the Kushans and Hepthalites established a small dynasty in Kabulistan called Shahi.

Islamization and Mongol invasion

Between the fourth and nineteenth centuries, much of modern Afghanistan was known by the regional name as Khorasan.()() Two of the four main capitals of Khorasan (i.e. Balkh, Merv, Nishapur and Herat) are now located in modern Afghanistan, while Kandahar, Zabulistan, Ghazni and Kabulistan formed the frontier between Khorasan and Hindustan.() The land inhabited by the Afghan tribes (i.e. ancestors of modern Pashtuns) was called Afghanistan, which loosely covered the area between the Kush and the River, with the Mountains being the center.()()
File:Herat Masjidi Jami courtyard.jpg|thumb|Built during the Ghurids era, the Mosque of Herat or Masjid Jami is one of the oldest mosques in Afghanistan.
Arab Muslims brought the message of Islam to the western area of what is now Afghanistan during the 7th century and began spreading eastward, some of the native inhabitants they encountered accepted it while others revolted.() Afghanistan at that time was Zoroastrian, Buddhist and Hindu, with smaller populations of Jews, Christians and others.() The Shahi rulers lost their Kabul capital in around 870 AD after it was conquered by the Saffarid Muslims of Zaranj. Later, the Samanids extended their Islamic influence into the Hindu Kush area from Bukhara in the north. It is reported that Muslims and non-Muslims lived side by side.921 AD

Afghanistan became one of the main centers in the world during the Golden Age.()( By the 11th century the Ghaznavids had finally Islamized all of the remaining non-Muslim areas, with the exception of the Kafiristan region. They were replaced by the Ghurids who expanded and advanced the already powerful empire. In 1219 AD, Khan and his Mongol barbarians overran the region. His troops are said to have annihilated the Khorasanian cities of Herat and Balkh.(Central Asian world cities. Faculty.washington.edu.) The destruction caused by the Mongols depopulated major cities and forced many of the locals to revert to an agrarian rural society.(Obamas war: Deploying 17,000 raises stakes in Afghanistan. USATODAY.com. February 18, 2009.) Mongol rule continued with the Ilkhanate in the northwest while the dynasty controlled the Afghan tribal areas south of the Hindu Kush, until the invasion of Timur who established the dynasty in 1370.(Timurid Dynasty, Encyclopdia Britannica Online Edition.) During the Ghaznavid, Ghurid, and Timurid eras, Afghanistan produced many fine Islamic architectural monuments as well as numerous scientific and literary works.

Babur, a descendant of both Timur and Genghis Khan, arrived from Central Asia and captured Kabul from the Arghun dynasty, and from there he began to seize control of the central and eastern territories of Afghanistan. He remained in Kabulistan until 1526 when he and his army invaded Delhi in India to replace the Afghan dynasty with the Empire. From the 16th century to the early 18th century, Afghanistan was part of three regional kingdoms: the of Bukhara in north, the Safavids in the west and the remaining larger area was ruled by the Sultanate.

Afghan nation-state
Hotaki dynasty and the Durrani Empire

File:Mirwais-Hotak.jpeg|thumb|upright|Hotak revolted against the Safavid rule and declared the Kandahar region an independent Afghan kingdom in 1709, which was later expanded by his son Mahmud to include Persia.
Hotak, seen as Afghanistans Washington(), successfully rebelled against the Persian Safavids in 1709. He overthrew and killed Gurgin Khan, and made the Afghan region independent from Persia. By 1713, Mirwais had decisively defeated two larger Persian armies, one was led by Khusraw Khn (nephew of Gurgin) and the other by Rustam Khn. The armies were sent by Husayn, the Shah in Isfahan (now Iran), to re-take control of the Kandahar region.() Mirwais died of a natural cause in 1715 and was succeeded by his brother Abdul Aziz followed by his son Mahmud. In 1722, Mahmud led an Afghan army to the Persian capital of Isfahan, sacked the city after the of Gulnabad and proclaimed himself King of Persia.( The Persians were disloyal to the Afghan rulers, and after the massacre of thousands of religious scholars, nobles, and members of the Safavid family, the dynasty was ousted from Persia after the 1729 of Damghan.()

In 1738, Shah and his Afsharid forces captured Kandahar from Shah Hotaki, at which point the incarcerated 16 year old Shah Durrani was freed and made the commander of Nader Shahs four thousand Abdali Afghans.() From Kandahar they set out to conquer India, passing through Ghazni, Kabul, Lahore and ultimately plundering Delhi after the of Karnal. Nader Shah and his army abandoned Delhi but took with them huge treasure, which included the Koh-i-Noor and Noor diamonds.()

After the death of Nader Shah in 1747, the Afghans gathered near Kandahar at a jirga (grand assembly) to select their of state from a group of generals and Ahmad Shah Durrani was chosen. Regarded as the founder of modern Afghanistan,()()() Durrani and his Afghan army conquered the entire present-day Afghanistan, Pakistan, Khorasan and Kohistan provinces of Iran, along with Delhi in India.() He defeated the Sikhs of the Empire in the region nine times, one of the biggest battles was the 1761 Battle of Panipat. 

In October 1772, Ahmad Shah Durrani died of a natural cause and was buried at a site now adjacent to the of the Cloak in Kandahar. He was succeeded by his son, Shah Durrani, who transferred the capital of Afghanistan from Kandahar to Kabul in 1776. After Timur Shahs death in 1793, the Durrani throne was passed down to his son Zaman Shah followed by Mahmud Shah, Shuja Shah and others. 

The Afghan Empire was under threat in the early 1800s by the Sikhs in the east and the Persians in the west. The western province of Herat was invaded by the Persians but was successfully fought off by Fateh Khan, brother of Mohammad Khan. The Sikhs, under Singh, invaded Afghanistans Pakhtunkhwa region in 1809.(Nalwa, V. (2009), Hari Singh Nalwa  Champion of the Khalsaji, New Delhi: Manohar, p. 18, ISBN 81-7304-785-5.) Fateh Khan was defeated by Singh Nalwa in the 1813 of Attock.() Fateh Khan had installed 21 of his brothers in positions of power throughout the Afghan Empire. After his death, they rebelled and divided up the provinces of the empire between themselves. During this turbulent period, Afghanistan had many temporary rulers until Dost Mohammad Khans take over in 1826.( The Afghan army descended in 1837 through the Pass on Sikh forces at Jamrud. The Sikhs held off the Afghan offensive for over a week  the time it took reinforcements to reach Jamrud from Lahore.(Nalwa, V. (2009), Hari Singh Nalwa  Champion of the Khalsaji, New Delhi: Manohar, p. 198, ISBN 81-7304-785-5.) By this time the British had reached the area from the east, which initiated the Anglo-Afghan War (1839-1842).

Barakzai dynasty and Western influence

File:Kandahar-1881.jpg|thumb|British and allied forces at Kandahar after the 1880 of Kandahar, during the Anglo-Afghan War. The large defensive wall around the city was removed in the early 1930s by the order of King Nadir Shah, the father of King Zahir Shah.
Following the Anglo-Afghan War and the ascension of the dynasty, Afghanistan saw much of its territory and autonomy ceded to British India. Ethnic Pashtun territories were divided by the 1893 Line, an action which would lead to strained relations between Afghanistan and British India (later the new state of Pakistan). The United Kingdom exercised a great deal of influence, and it was not until the reign of King Khan in 1919 that Afghanistan re-gained independence over its foreign affairs after the signing of the of Rawalpindi.
File:Bundesarchiv Bild 102-05493, Berlin, Besuch Knig von Afghanistan.jpg|thumb|left|King Khan at Berlin in February 1928. His 192728 European tour initiated an alliance between Afghanistan and Germany.
King Amanullah moved to end his countrys traditional isolation in the years following the Anglo-Afghan War. He established diplomatic relations with major states and, following a 192728 tour of Europe and Turkey, introduced several reforms intended to modernize his nation. A key force behind these reforms was Tarzi, an ardent supporter of the education of women. He fought for Article 68 of Afghanistans first constitution (declared through a Jirga), which made elementary education compulsory.(Education in Afghanistan, published in Encyclopdia Iranica, volume VIII  pp. 237241...UIUC.edu.) 

Some of the reforms that were actually put in place, such as the abolition of the traditional burqa for women and the opening of a number of co-educational schools, quickly alienated many tribal and religious leaders. Faced with overwhelming armed opposition, Amanullah Khan was forced to abdicate in January 1929 after Kabul fell to rebel forces led by Kalakani. Prince Nadir Shah, Amanullahs cousin, in turn defeated and killed Habibullah Kalakani in November 1929, and was declared King Nadir Shah. He abandoned the reforms of Amanullah Khan in favor of a more gradual approach to modernisation. In 1933, however, he was assassinated in a revenge killing by a Kabul student. 

Zahir Shah, Nadir Shahs 19-year-old son, succeeded to the throne and reigned from 1933 to 1973. Until 1946 Zahir Shah ruled with the assistance of his uncle, who held the post of Prime Minister and continued the policies of Nadir Shah. Another of Zahir Shahs uncles, Mahmud Khan, became Prime Minister in 1946 and began an experiment allowing greater political freedom, but reversed the policy when it went further than he expected. He was replaced in 1953 by Daoud Khan, the kings cousin and brother-in-law. Daoud Khan sought a closer relationship with the Union and a more distant one towards Pakistan. Afghanistan remained neutral and was neither a participant in War II, nor aligned with either power bloc in the War. However, it was a beneficiary of the latter rivalry as both the Soviet Union and the United States vied for influence by building Afghanistans main highways, airports and other vital infrastructure. By the late 1960s, many Western travelers were using these as part of the trail. In 1973, while King Zahir Shah was on an official overseas visit, Daoud Khan launched a bloodless coup and became the first of Afghanistan.

Marxist revolution and Soviet war

File:Day after Saur revolution in Kabul (773).jpg|thumb|Outside the Presidential Palace (Arg) in Kabul, a day after the Marxist revolution in April 1978.
In 1978, a prominent member of the Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA), Akbar Khyber, was allegedly killed by the Daoud government. Leaders of the PDPA feared that Daoud was planning to dismantle them because many were being arrested. Amin along with other PDPA members managed to remain at large and organised an uprising. The PDPA, led by Mohammad Taraki, Karmal and Hafizullah Amin, overthrew the regime of Mohammad Daoud, who was assassinated along with his family and relatives. Taraki was declared President, Prime Minister and General Secretary of the PDPA. He moved to carry out an ill-conceived reform, which was misunderstood by virtually all Afghans.() The PDPA imprisoned, tortured and murdered thousands of members of the traditional elite, the religious establishment, and the intelligentsia.( They also prohibited usury() and made a number of statements on womens rights, by declaring equality of the sexes( and introducing women to political life. Ratebzad was one of several female Marxist leaders and a member of the Revolutionary Council.
troops (in right row) withdrawing from Afghanistan in 1988. Afghan military BTR on the left.
As part of its War strategy, the United States strengthened political ties with Pakistan althought Brzezinski, National Security Advisor to U.S. President Carter, has warned that this might prompt a Soviet intervention.(French journal: Le Nouvel Observateur, 1521 January 1998. in an interview, Brzezinski claimed that these measures were in fact specifically designed to provoke a Soviet military intervention. http://contreinfo.info/article.php3?id_article1403%E2%80%B3) The Intelligence Agency (CIA) began using Pakistans Intelligence (ISI) as a proxy network to recruit, finance and arm the multi-national Mujahideen fighters inside Pakistan, which was aimed to prevent the Soviet Union from reaching the oil-rich Gulf through Balochistan. In March 1979, Hafizullah Amin took over as Prime Minister of Afghanistan, retaining the position of marshal and becoming Vice-President of the Supreme Defence Council. Taraki remained the president and in control of the army until he was killed in September 1979.

To bolster the Parcham faction and as part of its Cold War strategy to ultimately reach Gwadar in Balochistan, the Soviet Union decided to invade Afghanistan in December 1979 by sending over 100,000 soldiers of the Army to its southern neighbor. In the meantime, Hafizullah Amin was killed and replaced by Babrak Karmal. In response to all these, the Reagan administration in the U.S. increased arming and funding of the Mujahideen, thanks in large part to the efforts of Charlie Wilson and CIA officer Avrakotos. Early reports estimated $620 billion() but more recent reports suggest that up to $40 billion were provided by the U.S. and Arabia to Pakistan.()() This was in the forms of cash and weapons, which included over two thousand Stinger missiles. The money and weapons were directly given to Armed Forces, which was distributed by its ISI network to various Mujahideen groups although much of it was secretly kept for Pakistans own defense and other purposes. Despite receiving only minor aid compared to leaders of other Mujahideen groups, Shah Massoud was named the Afghan who won the cold war by the Wall Street Journal.()

The 10-year Soviet war resulted in the killings of between 600,000 to as high as 2 million Afghans, mostly civilians.() About 6million fled to Pakistan and Iran, and from there tens of thousands began immigrating to the Union, United States, Australia and other parts of the world.(Refugee Admissions Program for Near East and South Asia. Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration.) Faced with mounting international pressure and great number of casualties on both sides, the Soviets withdrew in 1989 but continued to support Afghan President Najibullah until 1992.(Afghanistan: History, Columbia Encyclopedia.)

Foreign interference and civil war
199296


After the fall of the communist Najibullah-regime in 1992, the Afghan political parties agreed on a peace and power-sharing agreement (the Peshawar Accords). The Peshawar Accords created the State of Afghanistan and appointed an government for a transitional period, under President Rabbani. According to Rights Watch:

Gulbuddin Hekmatyar received operational, financial and military support from Pakistan.() Afghanistan expert Saikal concludes in Modern Afghanistan: A History of Struggle and Survival:

In addition, Arabia and Iran  as competitors for regional hegemony  supported Afghan militias hostile towards each other.() According to Human Rights Watch, Iran was assisting the Shia Hazara Wahdat forces of Ali Mazari, as Iran was attempting to maximize Wahdats military power and influence.()((GUTMAN, Roy (2008): How We Missed the Story: Osama Bin Laden, the Taliban and the Hijacking of Afghanistan, Endowment of the United States Institute of Peace, 1st ed., Washington D.C.) Saudi Arabia supported the Wahhabite Rasul Sayyaf and his Islami faction.(( Conflict between the two militias soon escalated into a full-scale war. A publication by the Washington University describes:
Outside forces saw instability in Afghanistan as an opportunity to press their own security and political agendas.()

Due to the sudden initiation of the war, working government departments, police units or a system of justice and accountability for the newly-created Islamic State of Afghanistan did not have time to form. Atrocities were committed by individuals of the different armed factions while Kabul descended into lawlessness and chaos as described in reports by Human Rights Watch and the Afghanistan Justice Project.(() Because of the chaos, some leaders increasingly had only nominal control over their (sub-)commanders.() For civilians there was little security from murder, rape and extortion.( An estimated 25,000 people died during the most intense period of bombardment by Hekmatyars Hezb-i Islami and the Milli forces of Rashid Dostum, who had created an alliance with Hekmatyar in 1994.( Half a million people fled Afghanistan.( Human Rights Watch writes:


Southern Afghanistan was under the control of neither foreign-backed militias nor the government in Kabul, but was ruled by local leaders such as Agha Sherzai and their militias. In 1994, the Taliban (a movement originating from Ulema-e-Islam-run religious schools for Afghan refugees in Pakistan) also developed in Afghanistan as a politico-religious force, reportedly in opposition to the tyranny of the local governor.(Matinuddin, Kamal, The Taliban Phenomenon, Afghanistan 19941997, University Press, (1999), pp. 2526) Mullah Omar started his movement with fewer than 50 armed madrassah students in his hometown of Kandahar.( When the Taliban took control of the city in 1994, they forced the surrender of dozens of local Pashtun leaders who had presided over a situation of complete lawlessness and atrocities.( In 1994, the Taliban took power in several provinces in southern and central Afghanistan.

In late 1994, most of the militia factions (Hezb-i Islami, Junbish-i Milli and Hezb-i Wahdat) which had been fighting in the battle for control of Kabul were defeated militarily by forces of the Islamic States of Defense Shah Massoud. Bombardment of the capital came to a halt.((Amnesty International. Document  Afghanistan: further information on fear for safety and new concern: Deliberate and arbitrary killings: Civilians in Kabul. 16 November 1995 Accessed at: Amnesty.org)() The Islamic State government took steps to restore law and order.(BBC Newsnight 1995) Courts started to work again.( Massoud tried to initiate a nationwide process with the goal of national consolidation and democratic elections, also inviting the Taliban to join the process.() The Taliban declined.(

Taliban Emirate and United Front
19962001


File:Massoud and Qadir 2.PNG|thumb|Haji Abdul Qadir (left) shaking hands with Shah Massoud (right). They were both anti-Taliban leaders, Massoud was assassinated on 9 September 2001 by two al-Qaeda associates and is now recognized as a National Hero in Afghanistan, and Qadir was assassinated in July 2002.
The Taliban started shelling Kabul in early 1995 but were defeated by forces of the Islamic State government under Shah Massoud.( see video International, referring to the Taliban offensive, wrote in a 1995 report:

The Talibans early victories in 1994 were followed by a series of defeats that resulted in heavy losses.( Pakistan provided strong support to the Taliban.(() Many analysts like Saikal describe the Taliban as developing into a proxy force for Pakistans regional interests which the Taliban decline.(
On September 26, 1996, as the Taliban with military support by Pakistan and financial support by Saudi Arabia prepared for another major offensive, Massoud ordered a full retreat from Kabul.(Coll, Ghost Wars (New York: Penguin, 2005), 14.) The Taliban seized Kabul on September 27, 1996, and established the Emirate of Afghanistan. They imposed on the parts of Afghanistan under their control their political and judicial interpretation of Islam issuing edicts forbidding women to work outside the home, attend school, or to leave their homes unless accompanied by a male relative.() The Physicians for Human Rights (PHR) analyze:

After the fall of Kabul to the Taliban on September 27, 1996,( ) Ahmad Shah Massoud and Abdul Rashid Dostum, two former archnemesis, created the United Front (Northern Alliance) against the Taliban that were preparing offensives against the remaining areas under the control of Massoud and those under the control of Dostum. see video The United Front included beside the dominantly Tajik forces of Massoud and the Uzbek forces of Dostum, Hazara factions and Pashtun forces under the leadership of commanders such as Abdul Haq, Haji Abdul Qadir, Qari Baba or diplomat Rahim Ghafoorzai.

According to Human Rights Watch, in late May 1997, some 3,000 captive Taliban soldiers were summarily executed in and around Mazar-i-Sharif by Dostums Junbish forces and members of the Shia Hazara Wahdat faction.(() The Taliban defeated Dostums Junbish forces militarily by seizing Mazar-i-Sharif in 1998. Dostum went into exile.

According to a 55-page report by the UN, the Taliban, while trying to consolidate control over northern and western Afghanistan, committed systematic massacres against civilians.()() U.N. officials stated that there had been 15 massacres between 1996 and 2001.(( They also said, that these have been highly systematic and they all lead back to the Taliban Ministry of Defense or to Mullah Omar himself.(( The Taliban especially targeted people of Shia religious or Hazara ethnic background.(( Upon taking Mazar-i-Sharif in 1998, about 4,000 civilians were executed by the Taliban and many more reported tortured.()() The documents also reveal the role of Arab and Pakistani support troops in these killings.(( Bin Ladens so-called Brigade was responsible for mass-killings of Afghan civilians.() The report by the UN quotes eyewitnesses in many villages describing Arab fighters carrying long knives used for slitting throats and skinning people.((

Pakistani President Musharraf  then as Chief of Army Staff  was responsible for sending thousands of Pakistanis to fight alongside the Taliban and Bin Laden against the forces of Massoud.(((() In total there were believed to be 28,000 Pakistani nationals, many either from the Corps or army, fighting inside Afghanistan.( An estimated 8,000 Pakistani militants were recruited in madrassas filling the ranks of the estimated 25,000 regular Taliban force.( A 1998 document by the State Department confirms that 2040 percent of regular Taliban soldiers are Pakistani.( The document further states that the parents of those Pakistani nationals know nothing regarding their childs military involvement with the Taliban until their bodies are brought back to Pakistan.(

From 1996 to 2001 the Qaeda of Bin Laden and al-Zawahiri became a state within the Taliban state.() Bin Laden sent Arab recruits to join the fight against the United Front.(()
3,000 fighters of the regular Taliban army were Arab and Central Asian militants.(  In total, of roughly 45,000 Pakistani, Taliban and Al-Qaeda soldiers fighting against the forces of Massoud only 14,000 were Afghan.((

Ahmad Shah Massoud remained the only leader of the United Front in Afghanistan. In the areas under his control Massoud set up democratic institutions and signed the Rights Declaration.() Human Rights Watch cites no human rights crimes for the forces under direct control of Massoud for the period from October 1996 until the assassination of Massoud in September 2001.( As a consequence many civilians fled to the area of Shah Massoud.()() In total, estimates range up to one million people fleeing the Taliban.() Geographic concluded in its documentary Inside the Taliban:
:
In early 2001 Massoud addressed the Parliament in Brussels asking the international community to provide humanitarian help to the people of Afghanistan.( He stated that the Taliban and Qaeda had introduced a very wrong perception of Islam and that without the support of Pakistan and Bin Laden the Taliban would not be able to sustain their military campaign for up to a year.( On this visit to Europe he also warned that his intelligence had gathered information about a large-scale attack on U.S. soil being imminent.(Defense Intelligence Agency (2001) report gwu.edu)

Recent history (2001present)

On 9 September 2001, Shah Massoud was assassinated by two Arab attackers inside Afghanistan and two days later about 3,000 people became victims of the 11, 2001 attacks in the United States. Then US President W. Bush accused bin Laden and Sheikh Mohammed as the faces behind the attacks. When the Taliban refused to hand over bin Laden to US authorities and to disband al-Qaeda bases in Afghanistan, the US and British air forces began bombing al-Qaeda and Taliban targets inside Afghanistan during Enduring Freedom.() American and British special forces along with the CIA Activities Division units worked with commanders of the United Front (Northern Alliance) to launch a military offensive against the Taliban.(First In: An insiders account of how the CIA spearheaded the War on Terror in Afghanistan by Gary Schroen, 2005) This led to the of Mazar-i-Sharif and Kabul in November 2001, as the Taliban and al-Qaida crossed over the porous Line border into Pakistan. In December 2001, after the Taliban government was toppled and the new Afghan government under Karzai was formed, the Security Assistance Force (ISAF) was established by the Security Council to help assist the Karzai administration and provide basic security to the Afghan people.(  (UNSCR 1386))()
Choppers in Afghanistan 2008.jpg|thumb|US Army Chinook helicopters on their way to Bagram Air Base
File:Afghan soldiers.jpg|thumb|Soldiers of the National Army, including the Commando Battalion standing in the front.
File:Five suspected militants detained with 33 suicide vests in August 2011.jpg|thumb|left|Five Taliban insurgents detained with 33 suicide vests and 1,000 kg of explosives. In most cases, the insurgents are poor and uneducated people who are misled bymullahs that killing civilians and ISAF members in a suicide bombing will instantly earn them a place in paradise.()()
File:Mullen-Petraeus-Mattis-Allen-Hill-Langheld in Kabul.jpg|thumb|Clockwise: Admiral and of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Mike Mullen, standing with other top NATO military officials including Petraeus, Mattis, John Allen, Marvin Hill and Langheld of the Army.

While the Taliban began regrouping inside Pakistan, more coalition troops entered the escalating US-led war. Meanwhile, the rebuilding of war-torn Afghanistan kicked off in 2002.()() The Afghan nation was able to build democratic structures over the years, and some progress was made in key areas such as governance, economy, health, education, transport, and agriculture. NATO is training the Afghan armed forces as well its national police. ISAF and Afghan troops led many offensives against the Taliban but failed to fully defeat them. By 2009, a Taliban-led shadow government began to form in many parts of the country complete with their own version of mediation court.() As a result of this and other reasons, U.S. President Obama deployed another 30,000 soldiers in 2010 for a period of two years.

At the 2010 International Conference on Afghanistan in London, Afghan President Hamid Karzai said he intends to reach out to the Taliban leadership (including Mullah Omar, Haqqani and Hekmatyar). Supported by NATO, Karzai called on the groups leadership to take part in a jirga meeting to initiate peace talks. These steps have resulted in an intensification of bombings, assassinations and ambushes.() Some Afghan groups (including the former intelligence chief Saleh and opposition leader Dr. Abdullah) believe that Karzai plans to appease the insurgents senior leadership at the cost of the democratic constitution, the democratic process and progess in the field of human rights especially womens rights.() Dr. Abdullah stated:
:I should say that Taliban are not fighting in order to be accommodated. They are fighting in order to bring the state down. So its a futile exercise, and its just misleading. ... There are groups that will fight to the death. Whether we like to talk to them or we dont like to talk to them, they will continue to fight. So, for them, I dont think that we have a way forward with talks or negotiations or contacts or anything as such. Then we have to be prepared to tackle and deal with them militarily. In terms of the Taliban on the ground, there are lots of possibilities and opportunities that with the help of the people in different parts of the country, we can attract them to the peace process; provided, we create a favorable environment on this side of the line. At the moment, the people are leaving support for the government because of corruption. So that expectation is also not realistic at this stage.()

In FY 2009, the United States resettled just 328 refugees from Afghanistan.(Fiscal Year 2009 Refugee Arrivals. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.) By contrast, the U.S. admitted more than 100,000 Vietnamese refugees for resettlement during the Vietnam War.(Global Views: Iraqs refugees, by R. Nolan, Foreign Policy Association Features, Resource Library, June 12, 2007.) On the other hand, over five million refugees were repatriated in the last decade, including many who were forcefully deported from NATO countries.()() This large return of Afghans may have helped the nations economy but the country still remains one of the poorest in the world due to the decades of war, lack of foreign investment, ongoing government corruption and the Pakistani-backed insurgency.()() The United States also accuses neighboring Iran of providing small level of support to the Taliban insurgents.()()() According to a report by the United Nations, the Taliban and other militants were responsible for 76% of civilian casualties in 2009,() 75% in 2010() and 80% in 2011.()

After the May 2011 of Osama bin Laden in Pakistan, many prominent Afghan figures began being assassinated, including Daud Daud, Wali Karzai, Mohammad Khan, Haider Hamidi, Rabbani and others. Also in the same year, many large scale attacks by the Pakistani based network took place around the country. As a result, the United States warned Pakistan of a possible military action against the Haqqanis in the Administered Tribal Areas.() The U.S. blamed Pakistans government, mainly Army and its ISI spy agency, for many of the well cordinated attacks inside Afghanistan.( of the Joint Chiefs of Staff U.S. Ambassador to Pakistan, Munter, told Radio Pakistan that The attack that took place in Kabul a few days ago, that was the work of the Haqqani network. There is evidence linking the Haqqani Network to the Pakistan government. This is something that must stop.() Other top U.S. officials such as Hillary Clinton and Panetta made similar statements.()()

Government and politics

File:Inauguration of President Hamid Karzai in December 2004.jpg|thumb|Karzai standing next to Ahmad Shinwari and others after winning the 2004 presidential election. The last king of Afghanistan, Zahir Shah is sitting at the right.
File:Parliament delays summer recess.jpg|thumb|Assembly of Afghanistan
The government of Afghanistan is an republic consisting of three branches, executive, legislative and judicial. The nation is currently led by the Karzai administration with Karzai as the President and leader since late 2001. The National Assembly is the legislature, a bicameral body having two chambers, the House of the People and the of Elders. The Supreme Court is led by Chief Justice Salam Azimi, a former university professor who had been a legal advisor to the president.(E-Ariana.com, New Supreme Court Could Mark Genuine Departure  August 13, 2006.) The current court is seen as more moderate and led by more technocrats than the previous one, which was dominated by fundamentalist religious figures such as Chief Justice Ahmad Shinwari who issued several controversial rulings, including seeking to place a limit on the rights of women.

According to Internationals corruption perceptions index 2010 results, Afghanistan was ranked as the third most-corrupt country in the world.() A number of government ministries are believed to be rife with corruption, while President Karzai vowed to tackle the problem in late 2009 by stating that individuals who are involved in corruption will have no place in the government.() A January 2010 report published by the Nations Office on Drugs and Crime revealed that bribery consumes an amount equal to 23 percent of the GDP of the nation.() It should be noted that all institutions in the country are newly formed and starting from scratch, and that steps are taken to arrest those involved in corruption.()

Elections and parties

The 2004 Afghan presidential election was relatively peaceful, in which Hamid Karzai won in the first round with 55.4% of the votes. However, the 2009 presidential election was characterized by lack of security, low voter turnout and widespread electoral fraud.()(Karzai Gets New Term as Afghan Runoff is Scrapped) The vote, along with elections for 420 provincial council seats, took place in August 2009, but remained unresolved during a lengthy period of vote counting and fraud investigation.()

Two months later, under international pressure, a second round run-off vote between Karzai and remaining challenger Abdullah was announced, but a few days later Abdullah announced that he is not participating in the November 7 run-off because his demands for changes in the electoral commission had not been met. The next day, officials of the election commission cancelled the run-off and declared Hamid Karzai as President for another 5-year term.(

In the 2005 parliamentary election, among the elected officials were former mujahideen, fundamentalists, warlords, communists, reformists, and several Taliban associates.() In the same period, Afghanistan reached to the 30th nation in terms of female representation in parliament.() The last parliamentary election was held in September 2010, but due to disputes and investigation of fraud, the sworn in ceremony took place in late January 2011. After the issuance of computerized ID cards for the first time, which is a $101 million project that the Afghan government plans to start in 2012, it is expected to help prevent major fraud in future elections and improve the security situation.(Kabul residents to get computerised ID cards in 5 months. Pajhwok Afghan News. September 18, 2011.)

Political divisions

Afghanistan is administratively divided into 34 provinces (wilayats), with each province having its own capital and a provincial administration. The provinces are further divided into about 398 smaller provincial districts, each of which normally covers a city or a number of villages. Each district is represented by a district governor.

The provincial governors are appointed by the of Afghanistan and the district governors are selected by the provincial governors. The provincial governors are representatives of the central government in Kabul and are responsible for all administrative and formal issues within their provinces. There are also provincial councils which are elected through direct and general elections for a period of four years.(Explaining Elections, Independent Election Commission of Afghanistan) The functions of provincial councils are to take part in provincial development planning and to participate in monitoring and appraisal of other provincial governance institutions.

According to article 140 of the constitution and the presidential decree on electoral law, mayors of cities should be elected through free and direct elections for a four-year term. However, due to huge election costs, mayoral and municipal elections have never been held. Instead, mayors have been appointed by the government. As for the capital city of Kabul, the mayor is appointed by the President of Afghanistan.

The following is a list of all the 34 of Afghanistan in alphabetical order and on the right is a map showing where each province is located:
provinces numbered.png|thumb|300px|Afghanistan is divided into 34 provinces and every province is further divided into a number of districts

 Badakhshan
 Badghis
 Baghlan
 Balkh
 Bamyan
 Daykundi
 Farah
 Faryab
 Ghazni
 Ghor
 Helmand
 Herat
 Jowzjan
 Kabul
 Kandahar
 Kapisa
 Khost

 Konar
 Kunduz
 Laghman
 Logar
 Nangarhar
 Nimruz
 Nurestan
 Oruzgan
 Paktia
 Paktika
 Panjshir
 Parvan
 Samangan
 Sare Pol
 Takhar
 Wardak
 Zabol


Foreign relations and military

File:US Embassy in Kabul on July 4th 2010.jpg|thumb|The U.S. Embassy in Kabul. Official diplomatic relations between the United States and Afghanistan began in the early 1920s. The States Department of State has established a consulate in Herat in the west, with plans to open more in Mazar-e-Sharif in the north, Kandahar in the south, and Jalalabad in the east.
The Afghan Ministry of Foreign Affairs is responsible for managing the relations of Afghanistan. The nation has been a member of the UN since 1946, and has maintained good relations with the United States and other NATO member states since the signing of the of Rawalpindi in 1919. The Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA) was established in 2002 under Nations Security Council Resolution 1401 to help the nation recover from decades of war and establish a normal functioning government. Today, more than 22 NATO nations deploy about 140,000 troops in Afghanistan as part of the Security Assistance Force (ISAF). Apart from close military links, Afghanistan also enjoys strong economic relations with NATO members and their allies.
File:2011 Afghan Independence Day-4.jpg|thumb|left|guard of the Afghan armed forces during the 2011 commemoration of Independence Day.
Afghanistan also has diplomatic relations with neighboring Pakistan, Iran, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, the Republic of China, including regional states such as India, Turky, Kazakhstan, Russia, Arab Emirate, Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Egypt, Japan, South Korea, and others. Afghanistans relationship with Pakistan has often fluctuated since 1947.(Hasnat, Syed Farooq, Pakistan & Afghanistan: Domestic Pressures and Regional Threats in Journal of International Affairs, Vol. 63, Fall/Winter 2009, pp. 14155, Columbia University link Since 1947, serious differences and tensions have existed between the two respective governments at various phases of Pakistan-Afghanistan relations.)(Resolving the PakistanAfghanistan Stalemate, United States Institute of Peace, Afghanistan and Pakistan have had largely antagonistic relations under all governments) They have security and economic links with each other but disputes between the two states remain. Afghanistan continues to contest the porous and poorly-marked Line as its international border with Pakistan,() and has repeatedly accused Pakistan of supporting the Taliban insurgents, network, and other anti-Afghanistan terrorist groups.()() Pakistan harbors concerns over the growing influence of its rival India in Afghanistan.() Relations between the two states were strained further after recent border skirmishes and when Afghan officials alleged that Pakistani intelligence agencies are involved in terrorist attacks inside Afghanistan.() Despite these problems, Pakistan is a participant in the reconstruction of Afghanistan, pledging $250 million in various projects across the country,() and often announces that a stable Afghanistan is in their interest.(Stable Afghanistan in the interest of region: Zardari. Wasim Yousufzai. August 2, 2011.)

India and Iran have actively participated in reconstruction efforts in Afghanistan,() with India being the largest regional donor to the country.() Since 2002, India has pledged up to $2 billion in economic assistance to Afghanistan and has participated in multiple socio-economic reconstruction efforts, including power, roads, agricultural and educational projects.(() There are also military ties between Afghanistan and India, which is expected to increase after the October 2011 strategic pact that was signed by President Karzai and Prime Minister Singh.(Afghanistan signs 1st strategic pact _ with India)(Pakistan a twin brother, talks to go on: Karzai. Afghan News. Sujoy Dhar. October 5, 2011.)

The of Afghanistan is under the Ministry of Defense, which includes the National Army and the National Army Air Force. It currently has about 160,000 active soldiers and is expected to reach 260,000 in the coming years.( They are trained and equipped by NATO countries, mainly by the States Department of Defense. The ANA is divided into 7 major Corps, with the 201st Selab (Flood) in Kabul being the main one. The ANA also has a commando brigade which was established in 2007. The Military Academy of Afghanistan serves as the main educational institute for the militarymen of the country. A new $200 million Defense University (ADU) is under construction near the capital.

Economy

pomegranate processing.jpg|thumb|Workers processing pomegranates (anaar), which Afghanistan is famous for in Asia.
Afghanistan is an impoverished and developed country, one of the worlds poorest. The nations nominal GDP stands at $16.63 billion and the GDP per capita is about $900.() Its unemployment rate is 35% and roughly the same percentage of its citizens live below the poverty line.()() About 42 percent of the population live on less than $1 a day, according to a 2009 report.() Despite this, the economy has been growing strong in the last decade, which is due to the infusion of multi-billion dollars in international assistance and investments as well as remittances from expats. According to the Bank, economic growth has been strong and has generated better livelihoods since late 2001.() It is also due to improvements in agricultural production, which is the backbone of the nations economy.() The country is known for producing some of the finest pomegranates, grapes, apricots, melons, and several other fresh and dry fruits, including nuts.(Exporting Afghanistan, by P.J. Tobia. Nov 17, 2009.) 
File:Doost Marble Factory in Herat.jpg|thumb|left|The Doost Marble Factory in Herat. Current marble exports are estimated at $15 million per year. With improved extraction, processing, infrastructure, and investment, the industry has the potential to grow into a $450 million per year business.(Embassy, Kabul, Third Afghanistan Marble Conference, May 25, 2011.)

While the countrys current account deficit is largely financed with the donor money, only a small portion is provided directly to the government budget. The rest is provided to non-budgetary expenditure and donor-designated projects through the United Nations system and non-governmental organizations. The Afghan Ministry of Finance is focusing on improved revenue collection and public sector expenditure discipline. For example, government revenues increased 31% to $1.7 billion from March 2010 to March 2011. Afghanistan Bank serves as the central bank of the nation and the Afghani (AFN) is the national currency, with an exchange rate of 50 Afghanis to 1 US dollar. Since 2003, over 16 new banks have opened in the country, including International Bank, Bank, Bank, Bank, Chartered Bank, Micro Finance Bank, and others. 

One of the main drivers for the current economic recovery is the return of over 5 million Afghan expatriates, who brought with them fresh energy, entrepreneurship and wealth-creating skills as well as much needed funds to start up businesses. For the first time since the 1970s, Afghans have involved themselves in construction, one of the largest industries in the country, although some have been cheated by American contractors.() A number of companies and small factories began operating in different parts of the country, which not only provide revenues to the government but also create many jobs. Improvements to the business-enabling environment have resulted in more than $1.5 billion in telecom investment and created more than 100,000 jobs since 2003.() The rugs are becoming popular again and this gives many carpet dealers around the country to expand their business by hiring more workers.

Afghanistan is a member of SAARC, ECO and OIC. It is aiming to develop closer economic ties with neighboring countries in the so-called New Silk Road major project of the future. Foreign Minister Rassoul told the media in 2011 that his nations goal is to achieve an Afghan economy whose growth is based on trade, private enterprise and investment.() production in Afghanistan has soared to a record in 2007 with about 3 million people reported to be involved in the business(UN horrified by surge in opium trade in Helmand.) but then declined significantly in the years following.(Afghan opium production in significant decline, UNDOC) The government started programs to help reduce cultivation of poppy, and by 2010 it was reported that 24 out of the 34 provinces were free from poppy grow.

Mining and energy

Afghanistans economy has a brite future due to its natural resources. According to recent U.S. Geological surveys that were funded by the Afghan Ministry of Mines and Industry, Afghanistan may be possessing up to  of natural gas,  of petroleum and up to  of gas liquids.(Afghanistans Energy Future and its Potential Implications, Eurasianet.org.) Other recent reports show that the country has huge amounts of gold, copper, coal, iron ore and other minerals.()()()() In 2010, Pentagon officials along with geologists from the United States announced the discovery of $13 trillion worth untapped mineral deposits in Afghanistan.( Afghan officials assert that this will become the backbone of the Afghan economy and a memo from the Pentagon stated that Afghanistan could become the Saudi Arabia of lithium.()()()() Another US geological survey estimate from 2011 shows that the Khanashin carbonatites in the Province of the country have an estimated 1 million metric tonnes of earth elements.(Huge rare-earth material in Helmand: USGS. By Lalit K Jha for Afghan News. September 15, 2011.) Extraction of its copper and iron reserves is expected to start in 2013, which would earn billions of dollars in royalties and taxes every year for the next 100 years. Analysts believe that if the Afghan state was to generate even $10 billion per year from its mineral deposits, its national product would double and provide long-term funding for Afghan security forces and other critical needs.(OHanlon, Michael E. Deposits Could Aid Ailing Afghanistan, The Brookings Institution, 16 June 2010.)

Transport and communications

File:Ariana Afghan A310-300 F-GEMO.jpg|thumb|upright|Afghan Airlines
Afghanistan has about 53 airports, with the biggest ones being the International Airport, Air Base followed by International Airport in the south and Airport in the west. Afghan Airlines is the national carrier, with domestic flights between Kabul, Kandahar, Herat and Mazar-i-Sharif. International flights include to Dubai, Frankfurt, Istanbul, Delhi, Islamabad and a number of other Asian destinations.() There are limited domestic and international flight services available from the locally owned Air, Airways and Airways. Airlines from a number of regional nations such as Airlines, Air, Arabia, India, International Airlines and others also provide services to Afghanistan.

The country has limited rail service with Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan in the north. As of 2011, two other railway projects are in progress with neighboring nations, one is between Herat and Iran while another is to connect with Railways. Long distant journies are made by private coaches or private cars. Newer automobiles have recently become more widely available after the rebuilding of roads and highways. They are imported from the Arab Emirates through Pakistan and Iran. Afghanistans postal and package services such as FedEx, DHL and others make deliveries to major cities and towns.

Telecommunication services in the country are provided by Wireless, Etisalat, Roshan, Group and Telecom. In 2006, the Afghan Ministry of Communications signed a $64.5 million agreement with ZTE for the establishment of a countrywide fiber cable network. As of 2009, the country has 129,300 fixed telephone lines,(CIA.gov) about 12 million mobile phone subscribers(CIA.Gov) and 1 million internet users.(CIA.gov)

Demographics

As of July 2010, the population of Afghanistan is around 28,395,716() but it is unconfirmed if the 3 million refugees still living in Pakistan and Iran are included or not. A 2009 UN estimate shows that the Afghan population was 28,150,000() but a 20092010 nationwide survey conducted by the Central Statistics Office (CSO) of Afghanistan has put it at 26 million, not counting some parts of the country due to insecurity.( ) The only city with over a million residents is its capital, Kabul. The other major cities in the country are, in order of population size, Kandahar, Herat, Mazar-i-Sharif, Kunduz, Jalalabad, Gah, Taloqan, Khumri, Khost, Ghazni, Sheberghan, Sar-e Pol, and Farah. Urban areas are experiencing rapid population growth following the return of over 5 million expats from Pakistan and Iran. According to the Reference Bureau, the Afghan population is estimated to increase to 82 million by 2050.()

Ethnic groups

Army ethnolinguistic map of Afghanistan -- circa 2001-09.jpg|thumb|Ethnolinguistic groups of Afghanistan
Afghanistan is a society. The population of the country is divided into a wide variety of ethnolinguistic groups. Because a systematic census has not been held in the nation in decades, exact figures about the size and composition of the various ethnic groups are unvailable.(Afghan polls ethnic battleground  October 6, 2004. BBC)
An approximate distribution of the nations total ethnic groups is shown in the chart below:


Pashai man with flowers in his hair.jpg|thumb|Pashai boy
File:Village girls of Guzara district in Herat province-2009.jpg|thumb|Afghan girls from the District of Province
File:Boys in Ghazni.jpg|thumb|Boys from Province
The percentage numbers in the chart at the bottom are from recent national opinion polls aimed at knowing how Afghan citizens feel about the 2001present US-led war, the current political situation, as well as the economic and social issues affecting their daily lives. One was conducted in 2010 by the Asia Foundation (with technical assistance by the Afghan Center for Socio-economic and Opinion Research) and the other between 2004 to 2009 by a combined effort of the broadcasting companies ABC News, the BBC, and ARD.()()

The 2010 Asia Foundation survey involved 6,467 randomly selected Afghan citizens from across all of Afghanistans 34 provinces. The margin of sampling error in that survey is 4.4 percent, at a 95 percent confidence interval.()

To questions about their ethnicity at the end of the questionnaires, the results of the total 8,001 Afghan citizens (6,467 respondents from The Asia Foundation survey; 1,534 respondents from the ABC, BBC, and ARD survey) came as:



Languages

The two languages of Afghanistan are Pashto (since 1936) and (Persian) (since 1964), making bilingualism very common. Both are languages from the languages sub-family.() Persian has always been the prestige language and as the main means of inter-ethnic communication, maintaining its status of franca. Persian is the native tongue of various Afghan ethnic groups including the Tajiks, Hazaras, Aimaks and Kizilbash.() Pashto is the native tongue of the Pashtuns, although many non-Pashtuns are also fluent speakers of this language. Other languages, such as Uzbek, Arabic, Turkmen, Balochi, Pashayi and languages (Ashkunu, Kamkata-viri, Vasi-vari, Tregami and Kalasha-ala), are used as native tongue by minority groups across the country and have official status in the regions where they are widely spoken. Minor languages also include Pamiri (Shughni, Munji, Ishkashimi and Wakhi), Brahui, Hindko, Kyrgyz, etc. Many Afghans are also fluent in Urdu, Punjabi, Hindi, English, and other languages.(

{|classwikitable
|-
!|Language
!|World Factbook / Library of Congress Country Studies estimate()(
|- styletext-align:center;
! (Persian)
| 50%
|- styletext-align:center;
! Pashto
| 35%
|- styletext-align:center;
! Uzbek and Turkmen
| 11%
|- styletext-align:center;
! 30 minor languages
| 4%
|}

Religions

Over 99% of the Afghan population is Muslim: approximately 8085% follow the Sunni sect, 1519% are Shia, and 1% other.()()()() Until the 1890s, the region around Nuristan was known as Kafiristan (land of the kafirs) because of its inhabitants: the Nuristanis, an ethnically distinctive people who practiced animism, polytheism and shamanism.() Other than Muslims, there are tiny communities of Hindus and Sikhs found in the four major cities of the country. They number in the thousands.(Hinduism Today: Hindus Abandon Afghanistan.)(BBC South Asia: Sikhs struggle in Afghanistan.) There was also a small Jewish community in Afghanistan who emigrated to Israel and the United States by the end of the last century, and only one individual by the name of Simintov remains today.(Washingtonpost.com  Afghan Jew Becomes Countrys One and Only  N.C. Aizenman.)

Culture

Afghan Youth Voices Festival.jpg|thumb|300px|The 2011 Afghan Youth Voices Festival inside the Gardens of Babur in Kabul, which is the capital and a multi-ethnic city.
The Afghan culture has been around for over two millennia, tracing record to at least the time of the Achaemenid Empire in 500 BCE.()(Barbara Robson, Juliene Lipson, Farid Younos, Mariam Mehdi. ) It is mostly a nomadic and society, with different regions of the country having their own tradition, reflecting the multi-cultural and multi-lingual character of the nation. In the southern and eastern region, as well as western Pakistan which was historically part of Afghanistan, the people live according to the culture by following Pashtunwali, which is an ancient way of life that is still preserved.(US Library of Congress: Afghanistan  Ethnic Groups (Pashtun)) The remaining of the country is culturally Persian and Turkic. Some non-Pashtuns who live in close proximity with Pashtuns have adopted Pashtunwali() in a process called Pashtunization (or Afghanization) while some Pashtuns have been Persianized. Millions of Afghans who have been living in Pakistan and Iran over the last 30 years have been influenced by the cultures of those neighboring nations. 
File:Tribal and religious leaders in southern Afghanistan.jpg|thumb|upright|left|Men wearing their traditional Afghan dress in the ultra-conservative southern city of Kandahar.

Afghans display pride in their culture, nation, ancestry, and above all, their religion and independence. Like other highlanders, they are regarded with mingled apprehension and condescension, for their high regard for personal honor, for their tribe loyalty and for their readiness to use force to settle disputes.(Heathcote, Tony (1980, 2003) The Afghan Wars 18391919, Sellmount Staplehurst.) As tribal warfare and internecine feuding has been one of their chief occupations since time immemorial, this individualistic trait has made it difficult for foreigners to conquer them. Tony Heathcote considers the tribal system to be the best way of organizing large groups of people in a country that is geographically difficult, and in a society that, from a materialistic point of view, has an uncomplicated lifestyle.( There are an estimated 60 major tribes,(Pashtun (people). Encyclopdia Britannica.) and the Afghan nomads are estimated at about 23 million.(Afghanistan: Kuchi nomads seek a better deal. IRIN Asia. February 18, 2008.)

The nation has a complex history that has survived either in its current cultures or in the form of various languages and monuments. However, many of its historic monuments have been damaged in recent wars.(G.V. Brandolini. Afghanistan heritage. Orizzonte terra, Bergamo. 2007. p. 64.) The two famous of Bamiyan were destroyed by the Taliban, who regarded them as idolatrous. Despite that archaeologists are still finding Buddhist relics in different parts of the country, some of them date back to the 2nd century.()()() This indicates that Buddhism was widespread in Afghanistan. Other historical places include the cities of Herat, Kandahar, Ghazni, Mazar-i-Sharif, and Zarang. The of Jam in the Hari River valley is a UNESCO World Heritage site. A cloak reputedly worn by Islams Prophet Muhammad is kept inside the of the Cloak in Kandahar, a city founded by Alexander and the first capital of Afghanistan. The citadel of Alexander in the western city of Herat has been renovated in recent years and is a popular attraction for tourists. In the north of the country is the of Hazrat Ali, believed by many to be the location where Ali was buried. The Afghan Ministry of Information and Culture is renovating 42 historic sites in Ghazni until 2013, when the province will be declared as the capital of Islamic civilization.() The Museum of Afghanistan is located in Kabul.

Although literacy level is low, classic Persian and Pashto poetry play an important role in the Afghan culture. Poetry has always been one of the major educational pillars in the region, to the level that it has integrated itself into culture. Some notable poets include Rumi, Balkhi, Sanai, Jami, Khan Khattak, Baba, Khalili, and Pazhwak.(Classical Dari and Pashto Poets)

Media

File:Farhad Daryas Peace Concert in 2010-cropped.jpg|thumb|Darya performing at the Hotel in Kabul.
The Afghan mass media began in the early 20th century, with the first newspaper published in 1906. By the 1920s, Kabul was broadcasting local radio services. National Television was launched in 1974 but was closed in 1996 when the media was tightly controlled by the Taliban.(Dartnell, M. Y. Insurgency Online: Web Activism and Global Conflict. University of Toronto Press, 2006. ISBN 978-0-8020-8553-5.) Since 2002, press restrictions were gradually relaxed and private media diversified. of expression and the press is promoted in the 2004 constitution and censorship is banned, though defaming individuals or producing material contrary to the principles of Islam is prohibited. In 2008, Without Borders listed the media environment as 156 out of 173, with the 1st being most free. 400 publications were registered, at least 15 local Afghan television channels and 60 radio stations.(Afghanistan Press Report 2008, Freedom House.) Foreign radio stations, such as of America, World Service, and Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) broadcast into the country.

The city of Kabul has been home to many musicians in the past, who were masters of both traditional and modern Afghan music, especially during the Nowruz (New Year) and National Independence Day celebrations. Most Afghans are accustomed to watching Bollywood films from India and listening to its filmi hit songs. Many of the Bollywood film stars have roots in Afghanistan, including Madhubala, Khan, Khan, Khan, Khan, and others. Several Bollywood films such as Dharmatma, Gawah, from Taliban and Express have been shot inside Afghanistan.

Sports

The national football team has been competing in international football since 1941 and currently has a world ranking of 179. The national team plays its home games at the Stadium in Kabul, while in Afghanistan is governed by the Football Federation. The national team has never competed or qualified for the World Cup. The country also has a national team in the sport of futsal, a game very similar to football. Some of the other popular sports in Afghanistan include cricket, basketball, volleyball, taekwondo, boxing, and bodybuilding.()

Cricket, which is a newly introduced in Afghanistan fuelled by the success of the Afghan national cricket team is growing in popularity.() It has risen from the lower levels of international cricket to qualifying for the 2010 Twenty20 World Cup. More recently the under-19 team has qualified for the ICC Under-19 Cricket World Cup.() The Cricket Board (ACB) is the official governing body of the sport and is headquartered in Kabul. The Amanullah Khan International Cricket Stadium serves as the nations main cricket stadium, followed by the National Cricket Stadium. Several other stadiums are under construction.() Cricket is played between teams from different provinces, mostly by the Pashtuns on both sides of the Line.

Buzkashi is a traditional sport, mainly among the northern Afghans. It is similar to polo, played by horsemen in two teams, each trying to grab and hold a goat carcass. hounds (a type of running dog) originated in Afghanistan and was originally used in the sport of hunting.

Health and education

File:Regional Medical Hospital in Paktia.jpg|thumb|upright|Inside a regional military hospital in the Province
Before the Revolution in 1978, the nation had an improving care system. Ibn Sina Hospital and Ali Abad Hospital in Kabul were two of the leading health care institutions at the time. Health care was limited to urban areas only and was eventually destroyed during the civil war of the 1990s.() It is once again improving, which is due to the vaccination of children, training of medical staff and establishment of new hospitals. Many hospitals and clinics have been built over the last decade, with the most advanced treatments being available in Kabul. The Medical Institute for Children and Gandhi Childrens Hospital in Kabul are the leading hospitals in the country. Some of the other main hospitals in Kabul include the 350-bed Hospital and the Jinnah Hospital, which is still under construction. There are also a number of well-equipped military controlled hospitals in different regions of the country.

According to the Development Index, Afghanistan is the 15th least developed country in the world. The average life expectancy is 43.8 years. It is the most dangerous place for a child to be born, with the highest mortality rates in the world.() About 1 in 5 children dies before the age of five, and 1 out of every 8 women dies from causes related to pregnancy and childbirth.(() While these statistics are tragic, progress is being made. It was reported in 2006 that nearly 60% of the population lives within two hours walking distance of the nearest health facility, up from nine percent in 2002. Infant mortality has decreased by 22% and child mortality has dropped by 26% since 2003.() The Afghan Ministry of Public Health plans to further cut the infant mortality rate from the current 1,600 to 400 for every 100,000 live births by the year 2020.( and Health Surveys is working with the Institute of Health Management Research to conduct a survey in Afghanistan focusing on death, among other things.() The nation also has one of the highest incidences of people with disabilities, with an estimated one million handicapped people.(Empowering Afghanistans Disabled Population. Usaid.gov. March 31, 2006.) About 80,000 citizens have lost limbs, mainly as a result of landmines.(Afghanistans refugee crisis ignored. The Guardian. February 13, 2008.)(Afghanistan: People living with disabilities call for integration. IRIN Asia.) Non-governmental charities such as Promise assist orphans in association with governmental structures.(Virginia Haussegger Mahoobas Promise ABC TV 7.30 Report. 2009. ABC.net.au. Retrieved July 15, 2009.)
File:Saleha Bayat Building at AUAF in Kabul-2.jpg|thumb|left|300px|University of Afghanistan (AUAF) in Kabul.

Education in the country includes K-12 and Education, which is supervised by the Ministry of Education and Ministry of Higher Education.() The nations education system was destroyed due to the decades of war, but it began reviving after the Karzai administration came to power in late 2001. About 4,000 schools were built since 2002, with more than 100,000 teachers being trained and recruited.() It was reported in 2011 that more than seven million male and female students were enrolled in schools.(

As of 2011, about 62,000 students are enrolled in different universities around the country.( University reopened in 2002 to both male and female students. In 2006, the University of Afghanistan was established in Kabul, with the aim of providing a world-class, English-language, co-educational learning environment in Afghanistan. The capital of Kabul serves as the learning center of Afghanistan, with many of the best institutions being based there. Major universities outside of Kabul include University in the south, University in the northwest, University in the north, University and University in the eastern zones, as well as a number of others. The Military Academy of Afghanistan, modeled after the States Military Academy at West Point, is a four-year military development institution dedicated to graduating officers for the Afghan armed forces. The $200 million Defense University is under construction near Qargha in Kabul. The United States is building six faculties of education and five provincial teacher training colleges around the country, two large secondary schools in Kabul and one school in Jalalabad.(

Literacy rate of the entire population is very low, possibly at 34% but is improving rapidly. Female literacy may be as low as only 10%. In 2010, the United States began establishing a number of Lincoln learning centers in Afghanistan. They are set up to serve as programming platforms offering English language classes, library facilities, programming venues, Internet connectivity, educational and other counseling services. A goal of the program is to reach at least 4,000 Afghan citizens per month per location.(http://photos.state.gov/libraries/afghanistan/231771/PDFs/RFP-Lincoln-Learning-Centers.pdf)(
http://waronterrornews.typepad.com/home/2010/09/ghazni-gov-lincoln-learning-center.html) What Afghanistan needs is NATO supported scholarship programs to take massive number of students abroad so that when they return after finishing studies they can move their nation forward and quickly catch up with the rest of the world.

Crime and law enforcement

File:ANP moving in vehicles in 2010.jpg|thumb|National Police
The Directorate of Security (NDS) is the nations domestic agency, which operates similar to that of the States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and has between 15,000 to 30,000 employees. The nation also has about 126,000 national police officers, with plans to recruit more so that the total number can reach 160,000. The National Police (ANP) is under the Ministry of the Interior, which is based in Kabul and headed by Khan Mohammadi. The National Civil Order Police is part of the Afghan National Police, which is divided into five Brigades, each commanded by a Brigadier General. These brigades are stationed in Kabul, Gardez, Kandahar, Herat, and Mazar-i-Sharif. Every province of the country has a provincial of Police who is appointed by the Ministry of Interior and is responsible for law enforcement in all the districts within the province.

Although they are being trained by NATO countries through the Police Program, there are still problems with the force. According to a 2009 news report, large percent of Afghan police officers are illiterate and are accused of demanding bribes.(For U.S., Vast Challenge To Expand Afghan Forces : NPR.) Jack Kem, deputy to the commander of NATO Training Mission Afghanistan and Combined Security Transition Command Afghanistan, stated that the literacy rate in the ANP will rise to over 50 percent by January 2012. What began as a voluntary literacy program became mandatory for basic police training in early 2011.() Approximately 17 percent of them test positive for illegal drugs. In 2009, President Karzai created two anti-corruption units within the nations Interior Ministry.() Former Interior Minister Atmar said that security officials from the U.S. (FBI), Britain (Yard) and the European Union will train prosecutors in the unit.

The south and eastern parts of Afghanistan are the most dangerous due to their distances from Kabul and their flourishing drug trade. These areas in particular are often patrolled by Taliban insurgents, and in many cases they plan attacks by using suicide bombers and planting explosive devices (IEDs) on roads. Every year many Afghan police officers are killed in the line of duty. The Border Police are responsible for protecting the nations airports and borders, especially the Line, which is a disputed border often used by criminal organizations and terrorists for their illegal activities. Reports in 2011 suggested that up to 3 million people are involved in the illegal drug business in Afghanistan, many of the attacks on government employees and institutions are carried out not only by the Taliban militants but also by powerful criminal gangs.(While US talks withdrawal, Afghan corruption soars, by Bradley Klapper, Associated Press. June 2011.) Drugs from Afghanistan are exported to Iran, Pakistan, Russia, India, the United Arab Emirate, and the European Union. The Afghan Ministry of Counter Narcotics which is supported by the international community is dealing with this problem.

Notes


See also

*Afghanistanism
*rankings of Afghanistan


References


Bibliography




External links

*Office of the President official government website
*
*10 myths about Afghanistan; the Guardian
*
*
*
*

list



list





list




list




























ace:Afghanistan
af:Afghanistan
als:Afghanistan
am:
ang:Afghanistan
ar:
an:Afganistn
roa-rup:Afganistan
frp:Afganistan
as:
ast:Afganistn
az:fqanstan
bn:
zh-min-nan:Afghanistan
be:
be-x-old:
bcl:Apganistan
bo:
bs:Afganistan
br:Afghanistan
bg:
ca:Afganistan
cv:
ceb:Afghanistan
cs:Afghnistn
cbk-zam:Afghanistan
co:Afghanistan
cy:Afghanistan
da:Afghanistan
pdc:Afganischtaan
de:Afghanistan
dv:
dsb:Afghanistan
dz:
et:Afganistan
el:
es:Afganistn
eo:Afganujo
ext:Afganistn
eu:Afganistan
fa:
hif:Afghanistan
fo:Afghanistan
fr:Afghanistan
fy:Afganistan
fur:Afghanistan
Afganastin
Afghanistaan
gag:Afganistan
gd:Afganastan
- 
gu:
got:
hak:-fu-hon
 
ko:
haw:Apekanikana
hy:
hi:
hsb:Afghanistan
hr:Afganistan
io:Afganistan
ilo:Afganistan
bpy:
id:Afganistan
ia:Afghanistan
ie:Afghanistan
os:
is:Afganistan
it:Afghanistan
he:
jv:Afganistan
kn:
pam:Afghanistan
krc:
ka:
csb:Afganistn
kk:
kw:Afghanistan
rw:Afuganisitani
ky:
sw:Afghanistan
ht:Afganistan
ku:Afxanistan
la:Afgania
lv:Afganistna
lb:Afghanistan
lt:Afganistanas
lij:Afghanistan
li:Afganistan
ln:Afganistni
jbo:afyganisTAN
lmo:Afghanistan
hu:Afganisztn
mk:
mg:Afganistana
ml:
mt:Afganistan
mr:
arz:
ms:Afghanistan
mdf:
mn:
my:
nah:Afganistan
na:Apeganitan
nl:Afghanistan
nds-nl:Afghanistan
ne:
new:
ja:
ce:I
pih:Afganistaan
no:Afghanistan
nn:Afghanistan
nov:Afganistan
oc:Afganistan
mhr:
uz:Afgoniston
pa:
pag:Afghanistan
pnb:
pap:Afganistn
ps:
km:
pms:Afgnistan
nds:Afghanistan
pl:Afganistan
pt:Afeganisto
kbd:
kaa:Afganstan
crh:Afanistan
ksh:Afghanistan
ro:Afganistan
rm:Afganistan
qu:Afgansuyu
rue:
ru:
sah:
se:Afganistna
sa:
sco:Afghanistan
stq:Afghanistan
sq:Afganistani
scn:Afganistn
si:
simple:Afghanistan
sd:
ss:I-Afugani
sk:Afganistan
sl:Afganistan
szl:Afgaistan
so:Afgaanistan
ckb:
sr:
sh:Afganistan
su:Apganistan
fi:Afganistan
sv:Afghanistan
tl:Apganistan
ta:
roa-tara:Afghanistan
tt:
te:
tet:Afeganistaun
th:
tg:
tr:Afganistan
tk:Owganystan
udm:
bug:Afghanistan
uk:
ur:
ug:
vec:Afganistan
vi:Afghanistan
vo:Lafganistn
fiu-vro:Afganistan
zh-classical:
war:Afganistan
wo:Afganistaan
wuu:
yi:
yo:Afghanstn
zh-yue:
diq:Efanstan
zea:Afghanistan
bat-smg:Afganstans
zh:</eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>791</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>Asteroid</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>

Asteroids (from Greek  star and  like, in form) are a class of Small Solar System Bodies in orbit around the Sun.  They have also been called planetoids, especially the larger ones. These terms have historically been applied to any astronomical object orbiting the Sun that did not show the disk of a planet and was not observed to have the characteristics of an active comet, but as small objects in the outer Solar System were discovered, their volatile-based surfaces were found to more closely resemble comets, and so were often distinguished from traditional asteroids.() Thus the term asteroid has come increasingly to refer specifically to the small rockyicy and metallic bodies of the inner Solar System out to the orbit of Jupiter. They are grouped with the outer bodiescentaurs, trojans, and objectsas planets, which is the term preferred in astronomical circles.(Asimov, Isaac, and Dole, Stephen H. Planets for Man (New York:  Random House, 1964), p.43) This article will restrict the use of the term asteroid to the minor planets of the inner Solar System. 

There are millions of asteroids, many thought to be the often shattered remnants of planetesimals, bodies within the young Suns nebula that never grew large enough to become planets.()  A large majority of known asteroids orbit in the belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter or co-orbital with Jupiter (the Trojans). However, other orbital families exist with significant populations, including the asteroids. Individual asteroids are classified by their characteristic spectra, with the majority falling into three main groups: C-type, S-type, and M-type. These were named after and are generally identified with carbon-rich, stony, and metallic compositions, respectively.



 Naming 

A newly discovered asteroid is given a provisional designation (such as ) consisting of the year of discovery and an alphanumeric code indicating the half-month of discovery and the sequence within that half-month. Once an asteroids orbit has been confirmed, it is given a number, and later may also be given a name (e.g. Eros). The formal naming convention uses parentheses around the number (e.g. (433) Eros), but dropping the parentheses is quite common. Informally, it is common to drop the number altogether, or to drop it after the first mention when a name is repeated in running text.

 Symbols 

The first asteroids to be discovered were assigned iconic symbols like the ones traditionally used to designate the planets. By 1855 there were two dozen asteroid symbols, which often occurred in several variants.()


Franz Encke made a major change in the 1854 edition of the Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch (BAJ, Berlin Astronomical Yearbook). He introduced a disk (circle), a traditional symbol for a star, as the generic symbol for an asteroid. The circle was then numbered in order of discovery to indicate a specific asteroid, though he assigned  to the fifth, Astraea, the first four continuing with their existing symbols. The numbered-circle convention was quickly adopted by the astronomical community, and no iconic symbols were created after 1855.(Except for Pluto and, in the astrological community, for a few outer bodies such as Chiron:  ) That year Astraeas number was bumped up to , but Ceres through Vesta would not be listed by their numbers until the 1867 edition. The circle would become a pair of parentheses, and the parentheses sometimes omitted altogether over the next few decades, leading to the modern convention.(

 Discovery 
Image:243 ida.jpg|thumb|right|Ida and its moon Dactyl. Dactyl is the first satellite of an asteroid to be discovered.
The first asteroid to be discovered, Ceres, was found in 1801 by Piazzi, and was originally considered to be a new planet.(Ceres is the largest asteroid and is now classified as a planet. All other asteroids are now classified as Small Solar System Bodies along with comets, centaurs, and the smaller trans-Neptunian objects.) This was followed by the discovery of other similar bodies, which with the equipment of the time appeared to be points of light, like stars, showing little or no planetary disc, though readily distinguishable from stars due to their apparent motions. This prompted the astronomer Sir William Herschel to propose the term asteroid, from Greek , asteroeids star-like, star-shaped, from ancient Greek , astr star, planet. In the early second half of the nineteenth century, the terms asteroid and planet (not always qualified as minor) were still used interchangeably; for example, the Annual of Scientific Discovery for 1871, page 316, reads Professor J. Watson has been awarded by the Paris Academy of Sciences, the astronomical prize, Lalande foundation, for the discovery of eight new asteroids in one year. The planet Lydia (No. 110), discovered by M. Borelly at the Marseilles Observatory ... M. Borelly had previously discovered two planets bearing the numbers 91 and 99 in the system of asteroids revolving between Mars and Jupiter.

 Historical methods 
Asteroid discovery methods have dramatically improved over the past two centuries.

In the last years of the 18th century, Baron Xaver von Zach organized a group of 24 astronomers to search the sky for the missing planet predicted at about 2.8 AU from the Sun by the law, partly because of the discovery, by Sir Herschel in 1781, of the planet Uranus at the distance predicted by the law. This task required that hand-drawn sky charts be prepared for all stars in the zodiacal band down to an agreed-upon limit of faintness. On subsequent nights, the sky would be charted again and any moving object would, hopefully, be spotted. The expected motion of the missing planet was about 30 seconds of arc per hour, readily discernible by observers.

The first object, Ceres, was not discovered by a member of the group, but rather by accident in 1801 by Piazzi, director of the observatory of Palermo in Sicily. He discovered a new star-like object in Taurus and followed the displacement of this object during several nights. His colleague, Friedrich Gauss, used these observations to find the exact distance from this unknown object to the Earth. Gauss calculations placed the object between the planets Mars and Jupiter. Piazzi named it after Ceres, the Roman goddess of agriculture.

Three other asteroids (Pallas, Juno, and Vesta) were discovered over the next few years, with Vesta found in 1807. After eight more years of fruitless searches, most astronomers assumed that there were no more and abandoned any further searches.

However, Ludwig Hencke persisted, and began searching for more asteroids in 1830. Fifteen years later, he found Astraea, the first new asteroid in 38 years. He also found Hebe less than two years later. After this, other astronomers joined in the search and at least one new asteroid was discovered every year after that (except the wartime year 1945). Notable asteroid hunters of this early era were J. R. Hind, de Gasparis, Robert Luther, H. M. S. Goldschmidt, Chacornac, James Ferguson, Robert Pogson, E. W. Tempel, J. C. Watson, C. H. F. Peters, A. Borrelly, J. Palisa, the Henry brothers and Charlois.

In 1891, however, Max Wolf pioneered the use of astrophotography to detect asteroids, which appeared as short streaks on long-exposure photographic plates. This dramatically increased the rate of detection compared with earlier visual methods: Wolf alone discovered 248 asteroids, beginning with Brucia, whereas only slightly more than 300 had been discovered up to that point. It was known that there were many more, but most astronomers did not bother with them, calling them vermin of the skies, a phrase due to Weiss.() Even a century later, only a few thousand asteroids were identified, numbered and named.

 Manual methods of the 1900s and modern reporting 
Until 1998, asteroids were discovered by a four-step process. First, a region of the sky was photographed by a wide-field telescope, or Astrograph. Pairs of photographs were taken, typically one hour apart. Multiple pairs could be taken over a series of days. Second, the two films of the same region were viewed under a stereoscope. Any body in orbit around the Sun would move slightly between the pair of films. Under the stereoscope, the image of the body would seem to float slightly above the background of stars. Third, once a moving body was identified, its location would be measured precisely using a digitizing microscope. The location would be measured relative to known star locations.()

These first three steps do not constitute asteroid discovery: the observer has only found an apparition, which gets a provisional designation, made up of the year of discovery, a letter representing the half-month of discovery, and finally a letter and a number indicating the discoverys sequential number (example: ).

The last step of discovery is to send the locations and time of observations to the Planet Center, where computer programs determine whether an apparition ties together earlier apparitions into a single orbit. If so, the object receives a catalogue number and the observer of the first apparition with a calculated orbit is declared the discoverer, and granted the honor of naming the object subject to the approval of the Astronomical Union.

 Computerized methods 
Image:Asteroid 2004 FH.gif|framed|right|
FH is the center dot being followed by the sequence; the object that flashes by during the clip is an artificial satellite.
There is increasing interest in identifying asteroids whose orbits cross Earths, and that could, given enough time, collide with Earth (see asteroids). The three most important groups of asteroids are the Apollos, Amors, and Atens. Various deflection strategies have been proposed, as early as the 1960s.

The near-Earth asteroid Eros had been discovered as long ago as 1898, and the 1930s brought a flurry of similar objects. In order of discovery, these were: Amor, Apollo, Adonis, and finally Hermes, which approached within 0.005 AU of the Earth in 1937. Astronomers began to realize the possibilities of Earth impact.

Two events in later decades increased the alarm: the increasing acceptance of Alvarez hypothesis that an event resulted in the Cretaceous-Tertiary extinction, and the 1994 observation of Shoemaker-Levy 9 crashing into Jupiter. The U.S. military also declassified the information that its military satellites, built to detect nuclear explosions, had detected hundreds of upper-atmosphere impacts by objects ranging from one to 10 metres across.

All these considerations helped spur the launch of highly efficient automated systems that consist of Charge-Coupled Device (CCD) cameras and computers directly connected to telescopes. Since 1998, a large majority of the asteroids have been discovered by such automated systems. A list of teams using such automated systems includes:()

* The Near-Earth Asteroid Research (LINEAR) team
* The Asteroid Tracking (NEAT) team
* Spacewatch
* The Lowell Observatory Near-Earth-Object Search (LONEOS) team
* The Sky Survey (CSS)
* The Imperatore Near-Earth Objects Survey (CINEOS) team
* The Spaceguard Association
* The Asteroid Survey (ADAS)

The LINEAR system alone has discovered 121,346 asteroids, as of March, 2011.() Among all the automated systems, 4711 near-Earth asteroids have been discovered() including over 600 more than  in diameter.

 Terminology  

Traditionally, small bodies orbiting the Sun were classified as asteroids, comets or meteoroids, with anything smaller than ten metres across being called a meteoroid.() The term asteroid is ill-defined. It never had a formal definition, with the broader term planet being preferred by the Astronomical Union from 1853 on. In 2006, the term Solar System Body was introduced to cover both most minor planets and comets.(The definition of Small Solar System Bodies says that they include most of the Solar System asteroids, most trans-Neptunian objects, comets, and other small bodies. The Final IAU Resolution on the definition of planet ready for voting (IAU)) Other languages prefer planetoid (Greek for planet-like), and this term is occasionally used in English for the larger asteroids. The word planetesimal has a similar meaning, but refers specifically to the small building blocks of the planets that existed when the Solar System was forming. The term planetule was coined by the  geologist Daniel Conybeare to describe minor planets,() but is not in common use. The three largest objects in the asteroid belt, Ceres, Pallas, and Vesta, grew to the stage of protoplanets. Ceres has been designated as a planet, the only one in the inner Solar System. 

When found, asteroids were seen as a class of objects distinct from comets, and there was no unified term for the two until Small Solar System Body was coined in 2006. The main difference between an asteroid and a comet is that a comet shows a coma due to sublimation of near surface ices by solar radiation. A few objects have ended up being dual-listed because they were first classified as minor planets but later showed evidence of cometary activity. Conversely, some (perhaps all) comets are eventually depleted of their surface volatile ices and become asteroids. A further distinction is that comets typically have more eccentric orbits than most asteroids; most asteroids with notably eccentric orbits are probably dormant or extinct comets.(Weissman, Paul R., William F. Bottke, Jr., and Harold F. Levinson. Evolution of Comets into Asteroids. Southwest Research Institute, Planetary Science Directorate. 2002. Web Retrieved 3 Aug. 2010)

For almost two centuries, from the discovery of Ceres in 1801 until the discovery of the first centaur, Chiron, in 1977, all known asteroids spent most of their time at or within the orbit of Jupiter, though a few such as Hidalgo ventured far beyond Jupiter for part of their orbit. When astronomers started finding more small bodies that permanently resided further out than Jupiter, now called centaurs, they numbered them among the traditional asteroids, though there was debate over whether they should be classified as asteroids or as a new type of object. Then, when the first object, QB1, was discovered in 1992, and especially when large numbers of similar objects started turning up, new terms were invented to sidestep the issue: Kuiper-belt object, object, object, and so on. These inhabit the cold outer reaches of the Solar System where ices remain solid and comet-like bodies are not expected to exhibit much cometary activity; if centaurs or trans-Neptunian objects were to venture close to the Sun, their volatile ices would sublimate, and traditional approaches would classify them as comets and not asteroids.

The innermost of these are the Kuiper-belt objects, called objects partly to avoid the need to classify them as asteroids or comets.(Are Kuiper Belt Objects asteroids?, Ask an astronomer, Cornell University) They are believed to be predominantly comet-like in composition, though some may be more akin to asteroids.(Asteroids and Comets, NASA website) Furthermore, most do not have the highly eccentric orbits associated with comets, and the ones so far discovered are larger than traditional comet nuclei. (The much more distant cloud is hypothesized to be the main reservoir of dormant comets.) Other recent observations, such as the analysis of the cometary dust collected by the Stardust probe, are increasingly blurring the distinction between comets and asteroids,(Comet Dust Seems More Asteroidy Scientific American, January 25, 2008) suggesting a continuum between asteroids and comets rather than a sharp dividing line.(Comet samples are surprisingly asteroid-like, New Scientist, 24 January 2008)

The minor planets beyond Jupiters orbit are sometimes also called asteroids, especially in popular presentations.(For instance, a joint NASA-JPL public-outreach website states:
 (See http://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/?asteroids))
However, it is becoming increasingly common for the term asteroid to be restricted to minor planets of the inner Solar System.( Therefore, this article will restrict itself for the most part to the classical asteroids: objects of the belt, trojans, and objects.

When the IAU introduced the class Small Solar System Bodies in 2006 to include most objects previously classified as minor planets and comets, they created the class of planets for the largest minor planetsthose that have enough mass to have become ellipsoidal under their own gravity. According to the IAU, the term minor planet may still be used, but generally the term Small Solar System Body will be preferred.(Questions and Answers on Planets, IAU) Currently only the largest object in the asteroid belt, Ceres, at about  across, has been placed in the dwarf planet category, although there are several large asteroids (Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea) that may be classified as dwarf planets when their shapes are better known.(Three new planets may join solar system, New Scientist, 16 August 2006)

 Formation 
It is believed that planetesimals in the asteroid belt evolved much like the rest of the nebula until Jupiter neared its current mass, at which point excitation from resonances with Jupiter ejected over 99% of planetesimals in the belt. Simulations and a discontinuity in spin rate and spectral properties suggest that asteroids larger than approximately  in diameter accreted during that early era, whereas smaller bodies are fragments from collisions between asteroids during or after the Jovian disruption.() Ceres and Vesta grew large enough to melt and differentiate, with heavy metallic elements sinking to the core, leaving rocky minerals in the crust.()

In the model, many Kuiper-belt objects are captured in the outer asteroid belt, at distances greater than 2.6 AU. Most were later ejected by Jupiter, but those that remained may be the asteroids, and possibly include Ceres.(William B. McKinnon, 2008, On The Possibility Of Large KBOs Being Injected Into The Outer Asteroid Belt. American Astronomical Society, DPS meeting #40, #38.03)

 Distribution within the Solar System 

Image:InnerSolarSystem-en.png|250px|thumb|right|The belt (white) and the asteroids (green)

Various dynamical groups of asteroids have been discovered orbiting in the inner Solar System. Their orbits are perturbed by the gravity of other bodies in the Solar System and by the effect. Significant populations include:

 Asteroid belt 


The majority of known asteroids orbit within the asteroid belt between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, generally in relatively low-eccentricity (i.e., not very elongated) orbits. This belt is now estimated to contain between 1.1 and 1.9 million asteroids larger than  in diameter,(

) and millions of smaller ones.(
World Book at NASA
) These asteroids may be remnants of the disk, and in this region the accretion of planetesimals into planets during the formative period of the Solar System was prevented by large gravitational perturbations by Jupiter.

 Trojans 


Trojan asteroids are a population that share an orbit with a larger planet or moon, but do not collide with it because they orbit in one of the two points of stability, L4 and L5, which lie 60 ahead of and behind the larger body.

The most significant population of Trojan asteroids are the Trojans. Although fewer Jupiter Trojans have been discovered as of 2010, it is thought that they are as numerous as the asteroids in the asteroid belt.

A couple trojans have also been found orbiting with Mars.(Neptune also has a few known trojans, and these are thought to actually be much more numerous than the Jovian trojans. However, they are often included in the trans-Neptunian population rather than counted with the asteroids.)

 Near-Earth asteroids 


Near-Earth asteroids, or NEAs, are asteroids that have orbits that pass close    to that of Earth.  Asteroids that actually cross the Earths orbital path are known as Earth-crossers. As of May 2010, 7,075 near-Earth asteroids are known and the number over one kilometre in diameter is estimated to be 5001,000.

 Characteristics 
 Size distribution 


Asteroids vary greatly in size, from almost 1000 kilometres for the largest down to rocks just tens of metres across.(Below 10 metres, these rocks are by convention considered to be meteoroids.) The three largest are very much like miniature planets: they are roughly spherical, have at least partly differentiated interiors,() and are thought to be surviving protoplanets. The vast majority, however, are much smaller and are irregularly shaped; they are thought to be either surviving planetesimals or fragments of larger bodies.

The planet Ceres is by far the largest asteroid, with a diameter of . The next largest are Pallas and Vesta, both with diameters of just over . Vesta is the only main-belt asteroid that can, on occasion, be visible to the naked eye. On some rare occasions, a near-Earth asteroid may briefly become visible without technical aid; see Apophis.

The mass of all the objects of the belt, lying between the orbits of Mars and Jupiter, is estimated to be about 2.8-3.2 kg, or about 4 percent of the mass of the Moon. Of this, Ceres comprises 0.95 kg, a third of the total.() Adding in the next three most massive objects, Vesta (9%), Pallas (7%), and Hygiea (3%), brings this figure up to 51%; while the three after that, Davida (1.2%), Interamnia (1.0%), and Europa (0.9%), only add another 3% to the total mass. The number of asteroids then increases rapidly as their individual masses decrease.

The number of asteroids decreases markedly with size. Although this generally follows a law, there are bumps at 5 km and 100 km, where more asteroids than expected from a distribution are found.(Davis 2002, Asteroids III, cited by eljko Ivezi)



Largest asteroids

image:masses of asteroids vs main belt.png|thumb|300px|right|The relative masses of the twelve largest asteroids known,(Recent Asteroid Mass Determinations. Maintained by Jim Baer. Last updated 2010-12-12. Access date 2011-09-02. The values of Juno and Herculina may be off by as much as 16%, and Euphrosyne by a third. The order of the lower eight may change as better data is acquired, but the values do not overlap with any known asteroid outside these twelve.) compared to the remaining mass of the asteroid belt.(
) 






 









Although their location in the asteroid belt excludes them from planet status, the four largest objects, Ceres, Vesta, Pallas, and Hygiea, are remnant protoplanets that share many characteristics common to planets, and are untypical compared to the majority of potato-shaped asteroids.



Ceres is the only asteroid large enough for its gravity to force it into a spheroidal shape, and so, according to the IAUs 2006 resolution on the definition of a planet, it has been classified as a planet.() Vesta may eventually be so classified as well. Ceres has a much higher absolute magnitude than the other asteroids, of around 3.32,() and may possess a surface layer of ice.() Like the planets, Ceres is differentiated: it has a crust, a mantle and a core.( Vesta, too, has a differentiated interior, though it formed inside the Solar Systems frost line, and so is devoid of water;
(
) its composition is mainly of basaltic rock such as olivine.( Pallas is unusual in that, like Uranus, it rotates on its side, with one pole regularly facing the Sun and the other facing away.() Its composition is similar to that of Ceres: high in carbon and silicon, and perhaps partially differentiated.() Hygiea is a carbonaceous asteroid and, unlike the other largest asteroids, lies relatively close to the of the ecliptic.
(

)

Rotation
Measurements of the rotation rates of large asteroids in the main belt show that there is an upper limit. No asteroid with a diameter larger than 100 meters has a period of rotation faster than 2.2 hours. For asteroids rotating faster than approximately this rate, the inertia at the surface is greater than the gravitational force, so any loose surface material would be flung out. However, a solid object should be able to rotate much more rapidly. This suggests that most asteroids with a diameter over 100 meters are piles formed through accumulation of debris after collisions between asteroids.()

 Composition 
The physical composition of asteroids is varied and in most cases poorly understood. Ceres appears to be composed of a rocky core covered by an icy mantle, where Vesta is thought to have a nickel-iron core, olivine mantle, and basaltic crust.(http://hubblesite.org/newscenter/archive/releases/1995/20/image/) Hygiea, however, which appears to have a uniformly primitive composition of carbonaceous chondrite, is thought to be the largest undifferentiated asteroid. Most of the smaller asteroids are thought to be piles of rubble held together loosely by gravity, though the largest are probably solid. Some asteroids have moons or are co-orbiting binaries: Rubble piles, moons, binaries, and scattered families are believed to be the results of collisions that disrupted a parent asteroid.

Asteroids contain traces of amino-acids and other organic compounds, and some speculate that asteroid impacts may have seeded the early Earth with the chemicals necessary to initiate life, or may have even brought life itself to Earth. (See also panspermia.)(Life is Sweet: Sugar-Packing Asteroids May Have Seeded Life on Earth, Space.com, 19 December 2001) In August 2011, a report, based on NASA studies with meteorites found on Earth, was published suggesting DNA and RNA components (adenine, guanine and related molecules) may have been formed on asteroids and comets in space.()()()

Only one asteroid, 4 Vesta, which has a reflective surface, is normally visible to the naked eye, and this only in very dark skies when it is favorably positioned. Rarely, small asteroids passing close to Earth may be naked-eye visible for a short time.(Closest Flyby of Large Asteroid to be Naked-Eye Visible, Space.com, 4 February 2005)

Composition is calculated from three primary sources: albedo, surface spectrum, and density. The last can only be determined accurately by observing the orbits of moons the asteroid might have. So far, every asteroid with moons has turned out to be a rubble pile, a loose conglomeration of rock and metal that may be half empty space by volume. The investigated asteroids are as large as 280 km in diameter, and include Hermione (268186183 km), and Sylvia (384262232 km). Only half a dozen asteroids are larger than 87 Sylvia, though none of them have moons; however, some smaller asteroids are thought to be more massive, suggesting they may not have been disrupted, and indeed Davida, the same size as Sylvia to within measurement error, is estimated to be two and a half times as massive, though this is highly uncertain. The fact that such large asteroids as Sylvia can be rubble piles, presumably due to disruptive impacts, has important consequences for the formation of the Solar system: Computer simulations of collisions involving solid bodies show them destroying each other as often as merging, but colliding rubble piles are more likely to merge. This means that the cores of the planets could have formed relatively quickly.(Marchis, Descamps, et al. Icarus, Feb. 2011)

Surface features
Image:(253) mathilde.jpg|thumb|right|Mathilde, a asteroid measuring about  across, covered in craters half that size. Photograph taken in 1997 by the Shoemaker probe.
Most asteroids outside the big four (Ceres, Pallas, Vesta, and Hygiea) are likely to be broadly similar in appearance, if irregular in shape. 50-km Mathilde (shown at right) is a rubble pile saturated with craters with diameters the size of the asteroids radius, and Earth-based observations of 300-km Davida, one of the largest asteroids after the big four, reveal a similarly angular profile, suggesting it is also saturated with radius-size craters.(A.R. Conrad et al. 2007. Direct measurement of the size, shape, and pole of 511 Davida with Keck AO in a single night, Icarus, doi:10.1016/j.icarus.2007.05.004) Medium-sized asteroids such as Mathilde and Ida that have been observed up close also reveal a deep regolith covering the surface. Of the big four, Pallas and Hygiea are practically unknown. Vesta has compression fractures encircling a radius-size crater at its south pole but is otherwise a spheroid. Ceres seems quite different in the glimpses Hubble has provided, with surface features that are unlikely to be due to simple craters and impact basins, but details will not be known until Dawn arrives in 2015.

 Classification 
Asteroids are commonly classified according to two criteria: the characteristics of their orbits, and features of their reflectance spectrum.

 Orbital classification 


Many asteroids have been placed in groups and families based on their orbital characteristics. Apart from the broadest divisions, it is customary to name a group of asteroids after the first member of that group to be discovered. Groups are relatively loose dynamical associations, whereas families are tighter and result from the catastrophic break-up of a large parent asteroid sometime in the past.() Families have only been recognized within the belt. They were first recognised by Hirayama in 1918 and are often called families in his honor.

About 30% to 35% of the bodies in the asteroid belt belong to dynamical families each thought to have a common origin in a past collision between asteroids.  A family has also been associated with the plutoid planet .

 Quasi-satellites and horseshoe objects 

Some asteroids have unusual orbits that are co-orbital with the Earth or some other planet. Examples are Cruithne and . The first instance of this type of orbital arrangement was discovered between Saturns moons Epimetheus and Janus.

Sometimes these horseshoe objects temporarily become quasi-satellites for a few decades or a few hundred years, before returning to their earlier status. Both Earth and Venus are known to have quasi-satellites.

Such objects, if associated with Earth or Venus or even hypothetically Mercury, are a special class of asteroids.  However, such objects could be associated with outer planets as well.

 Spectral classification 
Image:433eros.jpg|thumb|right|This picture of Eros shows the view looking from one end of the asteroid across the gouge on its underside and toward the opposite end. Features as small as  across can be seen.


In 1975, an asteroid taxonomic system based on colour, albedo, and spectral shape was developed by R. Chapman, Morrison, and Zellner.() These properties are thought to correspond to the composition of the asteroids surface material. The original classification system had three categories: C-types for dark carbonaceous objects (75% of known asteroids), S-types for stony (silicaceous) objects (17% of known asteroids) and U for those that did not fit into either C or S. This classification has since been expanded to include many other asteroid types. The number of types continues to grow as more asteroids are studied.

The two most widely used taxonomies now used are the Tholen classification and SMASS classification. The former was proposed in 1984 by J. Tholen, and was based on data collected from an eight-color asteroid survey performed in the 1980s. This resulted in 14 asteroid categories.() In 2002, the Small Main-Belt Asteroid Spectroscopic Survey resulted in a modified version of the Tholen taxonomy with 24 different types. Both systems have three broad categories of C, S, and X asteroids, where X consists of mostly metallic asteroids, such as the M-type. There are also several smaller classes.()

Note that the proportion of known asteroids falling into the various spectral types does not necessarily reflect the proportion of all asteroids that are of that type; some types are easier to detect than others, biasing the totals.

 Problems 
Originally, spectral designations were based on inferences of an asteroids composition.() However, the correspondence between spectral class and composition is not always very good, and a variety of classifications is in use. This has led to significant confusion. While asteroids of different spectral classifications are likely to be composed of different materials, there are no assurances that asteroids within the same taxonomic class are composed of similar materials.

At present, the spectral classification based on several coarse resolution spectroscopic surveys in the 1990s is still the standard. Scientists cannot agree on a better taxonomic system, largely due to the difficulty of obtaining detailed measurements consistently for a large sample of asteroids (e.g. finer resolution spectra, or non-spectral data such as densities would be very useful).

 Exploration 
Image:951 Gaspra.jpg|thumb|right|Gaspra is the first asteroid to be imaged in close-up.
imaged by the Dawn spacecraft
Until the age of space travel, objects in the asteroid belt were merely pinpricks of light in even the largest telescopes and their shapes and terrain remained a mystery. The best modern ground-based telescopes and the Earth-orbiting Space Telescope can resolve a small amount of detail on the surfaces of the largest asteroids, but even these mostly remain little more than fuzzy blobs. Limited information about the shapes and compositions of asteroids can be inferred from their curves (their variation in brightness as they rotate) and their spectral properties, and asteroid sizes can be estimated by timing the lengths of star occulations (when an asteroid passes directly in front of a star). Radar imaging can yield good information about asteroid shapes and orbital and rotational parameters, especially for near-Earth asteroids. In terms of delta v and propellant requirements, NEOs are more easily accessible than the Moon.(A Piloted Orion Flight to a Near-Earth Object: A Feasibility Study)

The first close-up photographs of asteroid-like objects were taken in 1971 when the 9 probe imaged Phobos and Deimos, the two small moons of Mars, which are probably captured asteroids. These images revealed the irregular, potato-like shapes of most asteroids, as did later images from the Voyager probes of the small moons of the giants.

The first true asteroid to be photographed in close-up was Gaspra in 1991, followed in 1993 by Ida and its moon Dactyl, all of which were imaged by the Galileo probe en route to Jupiter.

The first dedicated asteroid probe was Shoemaker, which photographed Mathilde in 1997, before entering into orbit around Eros, finally landing on its surface in 2001.

Other asteroids briefly visited by spacecraft en route to other destinations include Braille (by Space 1 in 1999), and Annefrank (by Stardust in 2002).

In September 2005, the Japanese Hayabusa probe started studying Itokawa in detail and was plagued with difficulties, but returned samples of its surface to earth on June 13, 2010.

The European Rosetta probe (launched in 2004) flew by teins in 2008 and Lutetia, the second-largest asteroid visited to date, in 2010.

In September 2007, NASA launched the Dawn Mission, which started orbiting the protoplanet Vesta in July 2011, and is to orbit Ceres in 2015. 4 Vesta is the largest asteroid visited to date.

It has been suggested that asteroids might be used as a source of materials that may be rare or exhausted on earth (mining), or materials for constructing habitats (see of the asteroids). Materials that are heavy and expensive to launch from earth may someday be mined from asteroids and used for manufacturing and construction.

 Fiction 


Asteroids and the asteroid belt are a staple of science fiction stories. Asteroids play several potential roles in science fiction: as places human beings might colonize, resources for extracting minerals, hazards encountered by spaceships traveling between two other points, and as a threat to life on Earth by potential impact.

 See also 

* belt
* mining
* Marco Polo
* probe
* BOOTES (Burst Observer and Optical Transient Exploring System)
* Asteroid groups and families
* Asteroids
* Binary asteroids
* (minor planet)
* planet
* event
* deflection strategies
* of asteroids named after people
* of asteroids named after places
* of minor planets
* of notable asteroids
* of asteroid names
* Mesoplanet
* planet
* Planet Center
* object
* Orion asteroid mission
* Pioneer 10 space probe
* of asteroid names


 Notes 
(

 References 


 External links 


* Rocks from the Main Belt asteroids
* Alphabetical list of minor planet names (ASCII) (Minor Planet Center)
* Near Earth Asteroid Tracking (NEAT)
* Asteroids Page at NASAs Solar System Exploration
* Asteroid Simulator with Moon and Earth
* Everything you wanted to know about comets and asteroids  Provided by Scientist.
* Alphabetical and numerical lists of minor planet names (Unicode) (Institute of Applied Astronomy)
* Future Asteroid Interception Research
* Near Earth Objects Dynamic Site
* Asteroids Dynamic Site Up-to-date osculating elements and orbital elements  University of Pisa, Italy.

* JPL small bodies database Current down-loadable ASCII table of orbit data and absolute mags H for over 200000 asteroids, sorted by number. Caltech/JPL.
* Asteroid naming statistics
* Spaceguard UK
* Large amount of information on asteroid groups collected by Grard Faure, translation Richard Miles.
* 1908 Siberian asteroid
* Committee on Small Body Nomenclature
* List of minor planet orbital groupings and families from ProjectPluto
* Cunningham, Clifford, Introduction to Asteroids: The Next Frontier, ISBN 0-943396-16-6
* L. Hilton: When Did the Asteroids Become Minor Planets?
* Kirkwood, Daniel; Relations between the Motions of some of the Minor Planets (1874).
* Schmadel, L.D. (2003). Dictionary of Minor Planet Names. 5th ed. IAU/Springer-Verlag: Heidelberg.
* Asteroid articles in Planetary Science Research Discoveries
* Catalogue of the Solar System Small Bodies Orbital Evolution












af:Asterode
als:Asteroid
ar:
an:Asteroide
ast:Asteroide
az:Asteroid
bn:
zh-min-nan:Si-hek-chhe
be:
be-x-old:
bar:Asteroid
bs:Asteroidi
br:Asteroidenn
bg:
ca:Asteroide
cv:
cs:Asteroid
cy:Asteroid
da:Asteroide
de:Asteroid
et:Asteroid
el:
eml:Asterid
es:Asteroide
eo:Asteroido
eu:Asteroide
fa:
tara
fr:Astrode
fy:Asterode
ga:Astarideach
gl:Asteroide
ko:
hi:
hr:Asteroidi
io:Asteroido-zono
id:Asteroid
ia:Asteroide
os:
is:Smstirni
it:Asteroide
he:
jv:Asteroid

pam:Asteroid
krc:

kk:
ku:Asterod
sw:Asteroidi
ht:Astewoyid
la:Asteroides
lv:Asterods
lb:Asteroid
lt:Asteroidas
li:Planetoed
hu:Kisbolyg
mk:
ml:
mt:Asterojde
ms:Asteroid
nl:Planetode
ja:
no:Asteroide
nn:Asteroide
oc:Asterode
uz:Asteroid

nds:Asteroid
pl:Planetoida
pt:Asteroide
ksh:Asteroid
ro:Asteroid
quyllurcha
rue:
ru:
sah:
stq:Planetoiden
sq:Asteroidet
scn:Astiridi
simple:Asteroid
sk:Asteroid
sl:Asteroid
sr:
sh:Asteroid
su:Astroid
fi:Asteroidi
sv:Asteroid
tl:Asteroyd
ta:
tt:Asteroidlar
th:
tr:Asteroyit
tk:Asteroid
uk:
ur:
vec:Asteroide
hnh tinh
vls:Asterode
war:Asteroyd
yi:
zh-yue:
bat-smg:Asteruoids
zh:</eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
