<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>1445</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>Acacia</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>



Acacia ( or ) is a genus of shrubs and trees belonging to the subfamily Mimosoideae of the family Fabaceae, first described in Africa by the Swedish botanist Linnaeus in 1773. Many non-Australian species tend to be thorny, whereas the majority of Australian acacias are not. They are pod-bearing, with sap and leaves typically bearing large amounts of tannins and tannins that historically in many species found use as pharmaceuticals and preservatives.

The generic name derives from  (akakia), the name given by early Greek botanist-physician Dioscorides (ca. 40-90) to the medicinal tree A. nilotica in his book Materia Medica.() This name derives from the Greek word for its characteristic thorns,  (akis, thorn).() The species name nilotica was given by Linnaeus from this trees best-known range along the Nile river.

Acacias are also known as thorntrees, thorns or wattles, including the yellow-fever acacia and umbrella acacias.

The genus Acacia previously contained roughly 1300 species, about 960 of them native to Australia, with the remainder spread around the tropical to warm-temperate regions of both hemispheres, including Europe, Africa, southern Asia, and the Americas. However, in 2005 the genus was divided into five separate genera. The name Acacia was retained for the majority of the Australian species and a few in tropical Asia, Madagascar and Islands. Most of the species outside Australia, and a small number of Australian species, were reclassified into Vachellia and Senegalia. The two final genera, Acaciella and Mariosousa, only contain about a dozen species from the Americas each.

 Classification 
File:Acacia pycnantha Golden Wattle.jpg|thumb|left|pycnantha

File:Acacia-berlandieri-flowers4.jpg|thumb|right|berlandieri
File:Acacia smallii 2.jpg|thumb|right|smallii

The traditional circumscription of the genus Acacia is not monophyletic. This discovery has led to the breaking up of Acacia into five genera as discussed in: of Acacia species. At the 17th Botanical Congress in Vienna, 2005, the much debated re-typification of the genus with an Australian species (which was validated by the 18th IBC in Melbourne, 2011) most of the traditional acacias of Africa are now treated in the genera Vachellia and Senegalia, while some of the American species are placed in Acaciella and Mariosousa. The majority of species still treated in the genus Acacia are confined to Australia.
In common parlance, the term acacia is occasionally misapplied to species of the genus Robinia, which also belongs in the pea family. pseudoacacia, an American species locally known as Black Locust, is sometimes called false acacia in cultivation in the Kingdom.

 Geography 
The southernmost species in the genus are dealbata (Silver Wattle), longifolia (Coast Wattle or Sydney Golden Wattle), mearnsii (Black Wattle), and melanoxylon (Blackwood), reaching 4330 S in Tasmania, Australia, while caven (Espinillo Negro) reaches nearly as far south in northeastern Province of Argentina. Australian species are usually called wattles, while African and American species tend to be known as acacias.

File:Acacia melanoxylon2.jpg|thumb|left|retinodes

albida, tortilis and Acacia iraqensis can be found growing wild in the Sinai desert and the Jordan valley. It is found in the savanna vegetation of the tropical continental climate. It grows wild in Montserrat West Indies; there it is locally referred to as cusha.

 Description 
The leaves of acacias are compound pinnate in general. In some species, however, more especially in the Australian and islands species, the leaflets are suppressed, and the leaf-stalks (petioles) become vertically flattened, and serve the purpose of leaves. These are known as phyllodes. The vertical orientation of the phyllodes protects them from intense sunlight, as with their edges towards the sky and earth they do not intercept light so fully as horizontally placed leaves. A few species (such as glaucoptera) lack leaves or phyllodes altogether, but possess instead cladodes, modified leaf-like photosynthetic stems functioning as leaves.
File:Acacia dealbata.jpg||thumb|right|dealbata

The small flowers have five very small petals, almost hidden by the long stamens, and are arranged in dense globular or cylindrical clusters; they are yellow or cream-colored in most species, whitish in some, even purple (Acacia purpureapetala) or red (leprosa Scarlet Blaze). Acacia flowers can be distinguished from those of a large related genus, Albizia,  by their stamens which are not joined at the base. Also, unlike individual Mimosa flowers, those of Acacia have more than 10 stamens.()

The plants often bear spines, especially those species growing in arid regions. These sometimes represent branches which have become short, hard and pungent, or sometimes leaf-stipules. armata is the Kangaroo-thorn of Australia and erioloba is the Camelthorn of Africa.

Acacia seeds can be difficult to germinate. Research has found that immersing the seeds in various temperatures (usually around 80 C) and manual seed coat chipping can improve yields to approximately 80 percent.()

Symbiosis
File:Acacia collinsii3.jpg|thumb|right|collinsii stipules
In the American sphaerocephala, cornigera, and collinsii (collectively known as the bullthorn acacias), the large thorn-like stipules are hollow and afford shelter for several species of Pseudomyrmex ants, which feed on a secretion of sap on the leaf-stalk and small, lipid-rich food-bodies at the tips of the leaflets called Beltian bodies. In return, the ants add protection to the plant against herbivores.(

)  Some species of ants will also fight off competing plants around the acacia, cutting off the offending plants leaves with their jaws and ultimately killing it. Other associated ant species appear to do nothing to benefit their hosts.

Similar mutualisms with ants occur on Acacia trees in Africa, such as the Thorn acacia. The acacias provide shelter for ants in the hollow stipules and nectar in extrafloral nectaries for their symbiotic ants such as mimosae. In turn, the ants protect the plant by attacking large mammalian herbivores and stem-boring beetles that damage the plant.

 Pests 
In Australia, Acacia species are sometimes used as food plants by the larvae of hepialid moths of the genus Aenetus including A. ligniveren. These burrow horizontally into the trunk then vertically down. Other Lepidoptera larvae which have been recorded feeding on Acacia include Brown-tail, Endoclita malabaricus and Moth. The leaf-mining larvae of some bucculatricid moths also feed on Acacia: Bucculatrix agilis feeds exclusively on horrida and Bucculatrix flexuosa feeds exclusively on nilotica.

Acacias contain a number of compounds that defend them from pests and grazing animals.(Chemistry of Acacias from South Texas)

 Uses 
 Food uses 
File:Hauxya Botana.jpg|thumb|Acacia seed pods, also known as Guajes, served as part of a botana in Oaxaca, Mexico.
File:AcaciaSeeds.JPG|thumb|Acacia seeds in the Negev, Israel.
seeds are often used for food and a variety of other products.

In Burma, Laos and Thailand, the feathery shoots of Acacia pennata (common name cha-om,  and su pout ywet in Burmese) are used in soups, curries, omelettes, and stir-fries.

In Mexico the seeds are known as Guajes.  Guajes or huajes are the flat, green pods of an acacia tree. The pods are sometimes light green or deep red in colorboth taste the same. Guaje seeds are about the size of a small lima bean and are eaten raw with guacamole, sometimes cooked and made into a sauce. They can also be made into fritters. The ground seeds are used to impart a slightly garlicy flavor to a mole called guaxmole (huaxmole). The dried seeds may be toasted and salted and eaten as a snack referred to as cacalas.

The predominantly herbivorous spider kiplingi, which is found in Central America and Mexico, feeds on nubs at the tips of the acacia leaves, known as Beltian bodies, which contain high concentrations of protein.  These nubs are produced by the acacia as part of a symbiotic relationship with certain species of ant, which also eat them.(Meehan, Christopher J.; Olson, Eric J.; Curry, Robert L. (21 August 2008): Exploitation of the PseudomyrmexAcacia mutualism by a predominantly vegetarian jumping spider (Bagheera kiplingi). The 93rd ESA Annual Meeting.)

Acacia is listed as an ingredient in Drop, Fresca, a citrus drink, Cola, Barqs beer, Full Throttle Unleaded Drink, Strawberry-Lemonade Powerade(Powerade Ion4 Sports Drink, B Vitamin Enhanced, Strawberry Lemonade | Wegmans) as well as in Lkerol pastille candies, Altoids mints, Langers Pineapple coconut Juice, Wrigleys Eclipse gum and M&Ms Pretzel.

Honey labeled under the term Acacia Honey is a type of honey produced by bees from a false acacia known as locust in North America, but called by the misnomer  acacia in Europe, hence this liquid honey which practically doesnt crystallize does not come from true acacias.

Gum
Various species of acacia yield gum. True arabic is the product of senegal, abundant in dry tropical West Africa from Senegal to northern Nigeria.

arabica is the gum-Arabic tree of India, but yields a gum inferior to the true gum-Arabic.

File:Acacia covenyi02.jpg||thumb|left|covenyi

Medicinal uses
Many Acacia species have important uses in traditional medicine. Most of the uses have been shown to have a scientific basis since chemical compounds found in the various species have medicinal effects.

In medicine, nilotica is considered a remedy that is helpful for treating ejaculation.
A 19th century Ethiopian medical text describes a potion made from an Ethiopian species of Acacia (known as grar) mixed with the root of the tacha, then boiled, as a cure for rabies.(Richard Pankhurst, An Introduction to the Medical History of Ethiopia (Trenton: Red Sea Press, 1990), p. 97)

An astringent medicine high in tannins, called catechu or cutch, is procured from several species, but more especially from catechu, by boiling down the wood and evaporating the solution so as to get an extract.(An OCRd version of the US Dispensatory by Remington and Wood, 1918. )

Ornamental uses
A few species are widely grown as ornamentals in gardens; the most popular perhaps is dealbata (Silver Wattle), with its attractive glaucous to silvery leaves and bright yellow flowers; it is erroneously known as mimosa in some areas where it is cultivated, through confusion with the related genus Mimosa.

Another ornamental acacia is xanthophloea (Fever Tree).
Southern European florists use Acacia baileyana, Acacia dealbata, Acacia pycnantha and Acacia retinodes as cut flowers and the common name there for them is mimosa.(World Wide Wattle)

Ornamental species of acacia are also used by homeowners and architects for security. The sharp thorns of some species deter unauthorized persons from entering private properties, and may prevent break-ins if planted under windows and near drainpipes. The aesthetic characteristics of acacia plants, in conjunction with their home security qualities, makes them a considerable alternative to artificial fences and walls.

Paints
The ancient Egyptians used Acacia in paints.(Excerpt from A Consumers Dictionary of Cosmetic Ingredients: Fifth Edition (Paperback) Amazon.com)

Perfume
File:Acaciafarnesiana1web.jpg|thumb|left|farnesiana
farnesiana is used in the perfume industry due to its strong fragrance. The use of Acacia as a fragrance dates back centuries.

Symbolism and ritual
The Acacia is used as a symbol in Freemasonry, to represent purity and endurance of the soul, and as funerary symbolism signifying resurrection and immortality. The tree gains its importance from the description of the burial of Abiff, the builder of King Solomons Temple in Jerusalem.

Several parts (mainly bark, root and resin) of Acacia are used to make incense for rituals. Acacia is used in incense mainly in India, Nepal, and China including in its Tibet region. Smoke from Acacia bark is thought to keep demons and ghosts away and to put the gods in a good mood. Roots and resin from Acacia are combined with rhododendron, acorus, cytisus, salvia and some other components of incense. Both people and elephants like an alcoholic beverage made from acacia fruit.(Naturheilpraxis Fachforum (German) )
According to Eastons Bible Dictionary, the Acacia tree may be the burning bush (Exodus 3:2) which Moses encountered in the desert.(Eastons Bible Dictionary: Bush)  Also, when God gave Moses the instructions for building the Tabernacle, he said to make an ark  and a table of acacia wood (Exodus 25:10 & 23, Standard Version)

In Russia, Italy and other countries it is customary to present women with yellow mimosas (among other flowers) on Womens Day (March 8). These mimosas are actually from dealbata (Silver Wattle).

Tannin
File:Bottle of tannic acid.jpg|thumb|right|A bottle of acid.
The bark of various Australian species, known as wattles, is very rich in tannin and forms an important article of export; important species include pycnantha (Golden Wattle), decurrens (Tan Wattle), dealbata (Silver Wattle) and mearnsii (Black Wattle).

Black Wattle is grown in plantations in Africa. Most Australian acacia species introduced to South Africa have become an enormous problem, due to their naturally aggressive propagation. The pods of nilotica (under the name of neb-neb), and of other African species are also rich in tannin and used by tanners.

Wood
File:Starr 030405-0092 Acacia koa.jpg||thumb|right|koa Wood
File:Acacia Negev.JPG|thumb|right|Acacia tree near the end of its range in the Negev Desert of southern Israel.
Some Acacia species are valuable as timber, such as melanoxylon (Blackwood) from Australia, which attains a great size; its wood is used for furniture, and takes a high polish; and Acacia omalophylla (Myall Wood, also Australian), which yields a fragrant timber used for ornaments. seyal is thought to be the Shittah-tree of the Bible, which supplied shittim-wood. According to the of Exodus, this was used in the construction of the of the Covenant. Acacia koa from the Islands and heterophylla from Runion island are both excellent timber trees. Depending on abundance and regional culture, some Acacia species (e.g. Acacia fumosa), are traditionally used locally as firewoods.()



Pulpwood
In Indonesia (mainly in Sumatra) and in Malaysia (mainly in Sarawak) plantations of mangium are being established to supply pulpwood to the paper industry.

Acacia gives high opacity and below average bulk paper. This is suitable in lightweight offset papers used for bibles and dictionaries. It is also used in tissue where it improves softness.

Land Reclamation
Acacia can be planted for erosion control, especially after mining or construction damage.()

 Ecological invasion 
For the same reasons it is favored as an erosion-control plant, with its easy spreading and resilience, some varieties of acacia, are potentially an invasive species.  One of the most globally significant invasive Acacias is Black Wattle mearnsii,  which is taking over grasslands and abandoned agricultural areas worldwide, especially in moderate coastal and island regions where mild climate promotes its spread.  Australian/New Zealand Weed Risk Assessment gives it a high risk, score of 15 rating and it is considered one of the worlds 100 most invasive species.(Acacia mearnsii (PIER species info))
Extensive ecological studies should be performed before further introduction of acacia varieties as this fast-growing Genus, once introduced, spreads fast and is extremely difficult to eradicate.

Phytochemistry of Acacia
Alkaloids


As mentioned previously, Acacias contain a number of compounds that defend them from pests and grazing animals.( Many of these compounds are psychoactive in humans.
The alkaloids found in Acacias include dimethyltryptamine (DMT), 5-methoxy-dimethyltryptamine (5-MeO-DMT) and N-methyltryptamine (NMT). The plant leaves, stems and/or roots are sometimes made into a brew together with some MAOI-containing plant and consumed orally for healing, ceremonial or religious uses. mythology has associated the acacia tree with characteristics of the of life (see the article on the of Osiris and Isis).

Cyanogenic glycosides
Nineteen different species of Acacia in the Americas contain cyanogenic glycosides, which, if exposed to an enzyme which specifically splits glycosides, can release cyanide (HCN) in the acacia leaves.(Cyanogenic Glycosides in Ant-Acacias of Mexico and Central America David S. Seigler, John E. Ebinger The Southwestern Naturalist, Vol. 32, No. 4 (December 9, 1987), pp. 499-503 doi:10.2307/3671484) This sometimes results in the poisoning death of livestock.

If fresh plant material spontaneously produces 200 ppm or more HCN, then it is potentially toxic. This corresponds to about 7.5 mol HCN per gram of fresh plant material. It turns out that, if acacia leaves lack the specific glycoside-splitting enzyme, then they may be less toxic than otherwise, even those containing significant quantities of cyanic glycosides.(Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen By Robert Hegnauer)

Some Acacia species containing cyanogens:
* erioloba
* Acacia cunninghamii
* Acacia obtusifolia
* Acacia sieberiana
* Acacia sieberiana var. woodii(FAO Kamal M. Ibrahim, The current state of knowledge on Prosopis juliflora... )

 Species 
There are over 1,300 species of Acacia. See of Acacia species for a more complete listing.

Famous acacia
Perhaps the most famous acacia is the du Tnr in Niger. The reason for the trees fame is that it used to be the most isolated tree in the world, approximately  from any other tree. The tree was knocked down by a truck driver in 1973.

Identification gallery
Flowers

Image:Acacia aneura blossom.jpg|aneura
Image:Koeh-003.jpg|catechu
Image:Acacia baileyana.jpg|baileyana
Image:Acacia berlandieri branch.jpg|berlandieri
Image:Acacia confusa-01.jpg|confusa
Image:Acacia constricta flower.jpg|constricta, Las Vegas, Nevada, USA
Image:Acacia covenyi02.jpg|covenyi
Image:Acacia dealbata-1.jpg|dealbata
Image:Acacia denticulosa.jpg|denticulosa
Image:Acacia_drummodii_fg01.JPG|drummondii
Image:Akazie Blte PA060002 .JPG|erioloba Sossusvlei, Namibia
Image:Acacia fimbriata 02.jpg|fimbriata National Botanic Gardens, Canberra
Image:Acacia heterophylla (flowers) 2.JPG|heterophylla
Image:Acacia_longifolia_fg01.JPG|longifolia
Image:Acacia melanoxylon branch.jpg|melanoxylon Nazar, Portugal
Image:Acacia saligna(04).jpg|saligna Side, Turkey
Image:Acacia schinoides.JPG|schinoides Australian National Botanic Gardens
Image:Acacia tetragonophylla.jpg|tetragonophylla Botanic Gardens, Victoria, Australia
Image:Acacia pennata in Talakona forest, AP W2 IMG 8290.jpg|pennata in Talakona forest, in District of Pradesh, India
Image:Acacia pennata in Anantgiri, AP W IMG 8795.jpg|pennata at Hills, in district of Pradesh, India.


Bark

Image:Acacia-aneura-bark3.jpg|aneura Bark
Image:Starr 031013-0028 Acacia auriculiformis.jpg|auriculiformis Bark
Image:Acacia-berlandieri-bark.jpg|berlandieri Bark
Image:Acacia collinsii1.jpg|collinsii Bark
Image:Starr 050107-2872 Acacia confusa.jpg|confusa Bark, Hawaii, USA
Image:Yellow Mimosa.jpg|dealbata
Image:Acacia-decurrens2.jpg|decurrens
Image:Akazie Blte PA060002_.JPG|erioloba
Image:Acacia-estrophiolata-bark2.jpg|estrophiolataBark
Image:Acacia-greggii-bark.jpg|greggii Bark
Image:Acacia heterophylla 7.JPG|heterophyllaBark
Image:Acacia pennata trunk in Talakona forest, AP W IMG 8292.jpg|pennata trunk in Talakona forest, in District of Pradesh, India.


Foliage

Image:Koeh-003.jpg|catechu
Image:Acacia collinsii4.jpg|collinsii Foliage
Image:Acacia concinna Blanco2.374.png|concinna Foliage
Image:Acacia denticulosa.jpg|denticulosa Foliage
Image:Acacia karroo1.jpg|karroo Foliage
Image:Acacia leprosa1.jpg|leprosa Foliage
Image:Acacia pennata leaves in Talakona forest, AP W IMG 8291.jpg|pennata in Talakona forest, in District of Pradesh, India.
Image:Acacia pennata in Anantgiri, AP W IMG 8797.jpg|pennata at Hills, in district of Pradesh, India.


Seed pods

Image:Acacia aneura pods.jpg|aneura
Image:Koeh-003.jpg|catechu
Image:Starr_061224-2814_Acacia_confusa.jpg|confusa
Image:Acacia constricta pods.jpg|constricta
Image:Acacia dealbata fruto.jpg|dealbata
Image:Acacia heterophylla (1).JPG|heterophylla
Image:Acacia verticillata1.jpg|melanoxylon


Seeds

Image:Acacia baileyana seeds.jpg|baileyana
Image:Acacia berlandieri seeds.jpg|berlandieri
Image:Acacia confusa seeds.jpg|confusa
Image:Acacia constricta seeds.jpg |constricta
Image:Acacia cyclops seeds.jpg |cyclops
Image:Acacia dealbata seeds.jpg|dealbata
Image:Acde 001 lhp.jpg|decurrens
Image:Acfa 002 lhp.jpg|farnesiana
Image:Acacia greggii seeds.jpg|greggii
Image:Acacia longifolia seeds.jpg|longifolia
Image:Acacia mearnsii seeds.jpg|mearnsii
Image:Acme 001 lhp.jpg|melanoxylon
Image:Acacia pycnantha seeds.jpg|pycnantha
Image:Acacia rigidula seeds.jpg|rigidula
Image:Acacia tortuosa seeds.jpg|tortuosa


Thorns

Image:Koeh-003.jpg|catechu
Image:Acacia collinsii0.jpg|collinsii
Image:A-cornigera.jpg|cornigera
Image:Acacia-horrida.jpg|horrida
Image:Acacia-smallii-thorns.jpg|farnesiana var. farnesiana
Image:Acacia pennata in Talakona forest, AP W IMG 8290.jpg|pennata in Talakona forest, in District of Pradesh, India.



Tree

File:Mulga.jpg|aneura
Image:Acacia-berlandieri-habit.jpg|berlandieri
Image:Starr_050107-2872_Acacia_confusa.jpg|confusa
Image:Acacia constricta WPC.jpg|constricta
Image:Acacia dealbata1.jpg|dealbata
Image:Acacia heterophylla 1.JPG|heterophylla
File:Starr 040723-0533 Acacia_koa.jpg|koa
Image:Acacia leprosa2.jpg|leprosa


Wood

Image:Starr_030405-0092_Acacia_koa.jpg|koa
Image:PlateauxTamarin2.jpg|heterophylla
Image:Acacia-schaffneri-wood.jpg|schaffneri


 See also 
* of Acacia species
* defense against herbivory
* plants

 Notes 


 General references 
* Clement, B.A., Goff, C.M., Forbes, T.D.A. Toxic Amines and Alkaloids from Acacia rigidula, Phytochem. 1998, 49(5), 1377.
* Shulgin, Alexander and Ann, TiHKAL the Continuation. Transform Press, 1997. ISBN 978-0-9630096-9-2

 External links 


* 
* World Wide Wattle
* Acacia-world
* Waynes Word on The Unforgettable Acacias
* The genus Acacia and Entheogenic Tryptamines, with reference to Australian and related species, by mulga
* A description of Acacia from Pomets 1709 reference book, History of Druggs
* Dr. Dukes Phytochemical and Ethnobotanical Databases
* Flora identification tools from the State Herbarium of South Australia
* Tannins in Some Interrelated Wattles
* List of Acacia Species in the U.S.
* FAO Timber Properties of Various Acacia Species
* FAO Comparison of Various Acacia Species as Forage
* Long-term effects of roller chopping on antiherbivore defenses in three shrub species, Jason R. Schindlera, Timothy E. Fulbright
* Vet. Path. ResultsAFIP Wednesday Slide Conference - No. 21 February 24, 1999
* Acacia cyanophylla lindl as supplementary feed/for small stock in Libya
* Description of Acacia Morphology
* Nitrogen Fixaton in Acacias
* Acacias with Cyagenic Compounds
* Acacia Alarm System





ar:
guasu
az:Akasiya
bg:
ca:Accia
cs:Akcie
cy:Acesia
da:Akacie
de:Akazien
et:Akaatsia
el:
es:Acacia
eo:Akacio
eu:Akazia
fa:
fr:Acacia
gl:Acacia
ko:
hr:Akacija
io:Akacio
id:Akasia
it:Acacia
he:
kn:(Acacia)
pam:Acacia
ka:
kk:
la:Acacia
lt:Akacija
hu:Akcia
ml:
ro:Acacia
nl:Acacia
ja:
no:Akasieslekten
pnb:
pl:Akacja
pt:Accia
ru:
simple:Acacia
sr:
sh:Akacija
fi:Akasiat
sv:Akaciaslktet
tl:Akasya
te:
th:
ve:Muunga
tr:Akasya
uk:
za:Ahlahbozsugyauh
Keo
wa:Acacia
zh-yue:
zh:</eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>1446</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>Acapulco</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>
footnotes              


Acapulco (officially known as Acapulco de Jurez) is a city, municipality and major sea port in the state of Guerrero on the Pacific coast of Mexico,  southwest from City. Acapulco is located on a deep, semi-circular bay and has been a port since the early colonial period of Mexicos history.()  It is a port of call for shipping and cruising lines running between Panama and Francisco, California, States.() The city of Acapulco is the largest in the state, far larger than the state capital Chilpancingo and as well, Mexicos largest beach and balneario resorted city.()

The city is best known as one of Mexicos oldest and most well-known beach resorts, which came into prominence by the 1950s as a getaway for Hollywood stars and millionaires.()  Acapulco is still famous for its nightlife and still attracts many vacationers, although most are now from Mexico itself.()() The resort area is divided into two: The north end of the bay is the traditional area, where the famous in the mid 20th century vacationed and the south end is dominated by newer luxury high rise hotels.()

The name Acapulco comes from Nahuatl language Aca-pl-co, and means At the big reeds ()  or At the broken reeds.  de Jurez was added to the official name in 1885 to honor Jurez, the former of Mexico. The seal for the city shows broken reeds or cane.(

History
By the eighth century, there was a small culture in the Acapulco area, which would first be dominated by the Olmecs, then by a number of others during the pre-Hispanic period. In Acapulco bay itself, there were two Olmec sites, one by Playa Larga and the other on a hill known as El Guitarrn. Olmec influence caused the small spread-out villages here to coalesce into larger entities and build ceremonial centers. Later, Teotihuacan influence made its way here via Cuernavaca and Chilpancingo. Then Mayan influence arrived from the of Tehuantepec and through what is now Oaxaca. This history is known through the archeological artifacts that have been found here, especially at Playa Hornos, Pie de la Cuesta and Tambuco.(
In the 11th century, new waves of migration of Nahuas and Coixas came through here. These people were the antecedents of the Aztecs.  Acapulco formally became part of the Empire in 1486 during the reign of Ahuizotl. It was part of a tributary province called Tepecuacuilco, but control here was relatively unorganized.(


There are two stories about how Acapulco bay was discovered by Europeans. The first states that two years after the Conquest, Corts sent explorers west to find gold. The explorers had subdued this area after 1523, and Captain Saavedra Cern was authorized by Corts to found a settlement here. The other states that the bay was discovered on 13 December 1526 by a small ship named the El Tepache Santiago captained by Santiago Guevara.(
The first encomendero was established in 1525 at Cacahuatepec, which is part of the modern Acapulco municipality. In 1531, a number of Spaniards, most notably Rodriguez de Villafuerte, left the Oaxaca coast and founded the village of Villafuerte where the city of Acapulco now stands. Villafuerte was unable to subdue the local native peoples, and this eventually resulted in the Yopa Rebellion in the region of Cuautepec. Hernn Corts was obligated to send Vasco Porcayo to negotiate with the indigenous people giving concessions. The province of Acapulco became the encomendero of Rodriguez de Villafuerte who received taxes in the form of cocoa, cotton and corn.(

Corts established Acapulco as a major port by the early 1530s, with the first major road between Mexico City and the port constructed by 1531. The wharf, named Marqus, was constructed by 1533 between Bruja Point and Diamond Point. Soon after, the area was made an alcadia (major province or town).(

Spanish trade in the East would give Acapulco a prominent position in the economy of Spain. Galleons started arriving here from Asia by 1550, and in that year  thirty Spanish families were sent to live here from Mexico City to have a permanent base of European residents.( Acapulco would become the second most important port, after Veracruz, due to its direct trade with the Philippines. This trade would focus on the yearly Galleon, which was the nexus of all kinds on communications between New Spain, Europe and Asia. In 1573, the port was granted the monopoly of the Manila trade.(

File:Carl Saltzmann - View of Acapulco, 1879.jpg|thumb|upright|View of Acapulco, 1879, oil painting by Saltzmann
The Galleon would make its yearly run from the mid 16th century until the early 19th. The luxury items it brought to New Spain attracted the attention of English and Dutch pirates,  such as  Drake, Morgan and Cavendish, who called it The Black Ship.(( To protect the port and the cargo of ships coming here the San Diego Fort was built. Despite the forts existence, a Dutch fleet invaded Acapulco in 1615, destroying much of the town and fort before being driven off. The fort was destroyed by an earthquake in 1776 and was rebuilt in 1783.((
At the beginning of the 19th Century, King Charles IV declared Acapulco a Ciudad Official and it became an essential part of the Spanish Crown. However, soon after the War of Independence began.  In 1810, Mara Morelos y Pavn attacked and burnt down the city,( after he defeated royalist commander Francisco Pars at the Battle of Tres Palos.( The independence of Mexico in 1821 ended the run of the Manila Galleon.(
Acapulcos importance as a port recovered during the Gold Rush in the mid 19th century, with ships going to and coming from Panama stopping here.(

In 1911, revolutionary forces took over the main plaza of Acapulco.(
In 1920, the of Wales and future King Edward VIII visited the area. Impressed by what he saw, he recommended the place in Europe, making it popular with the elite there. Much of the original hotel and trading infrastructure was built by an East Texas businessman named Albert B.Pullen from Corrigan, Tx. in the area now known as Old Acapulco.( But some of Acapulcos best known hotels were built by others.  In 1933 Carlos Barnard started the first section of Hotel El Mirador,(Portal de Acapulco - Acapulco y su Arquitectura) with 12 rooms on the cliffs of La Quebrada. Wolf Shoenborn purchased large amounts of undeveloped land and Al Polin built the Las Americas Hotel.(

In the mid 1940s, the first commercial wharf and warehouses has been built.( In the early 1950s President Alemn Valds upgraded the ports infrastructure, installing electrical lines, drainage systems, roads and the first highway to connect the port with Mexico City.(


The economy grew and foreign investment increased with it. During the 1950s, Acapulco became the fashionable place for millionaires Hollywood stars such as Taylor, Sinatra, Eddie Fisher and Bardot.( Former Swing Musician Stauffer, so called Mister Acapulco, was a hotelowner (Villa Vera, Casablanca), who attracted a lot of celebrities to Acapulco.(Teddy Stauffer: Der Swingknig im Paradies - STOCKPRESS.de | STOCKPRESS.de)

From a population of only 4,000 or 5,000 in the 1940s,( by the early 1960s Acapulco had a population of about 50,000.(World Book Encyclopedia, 1967 Edition, Vol. 1, p. 19) In 1958, The Diocese of Acapulco was created by Pius XII. It would become an archdiocese in 1983.()

During the 1960s and 1970s, new hotel resorts were built, and accommodation and transport were made cheaper. It was no longer necessary to be a millionaire to spend a holiday in Acapulco, the foreign and Mexican middle class could now afford to travel here.( However, as more hotels were built in the south part of the bay, the old hotels of the 1950s lost their grandeur.()


In the 70s there was a significant expansion of the port.(

During the 1990s, the road known as the Ruta del Sol was built, crossing the mountains between Mexico City and Acapulco. The journey only takes about three and a half hours, making Acapulco a favorite weekend destination for Mexico City inhabitants.( The port continued to grow and in 1996, a new private company, API Acapulco, was created to manage operations. This consolidated operations and now Acapulco is the major port for car exports to the Pacific.(

The city was devastated by Pauline in 1997. The storm stranded tourists and left more than 100 dead in the city. Most of the victims were from the shantytowns that surround the city, built on steep hillsides. Other victims were swept away by thirty foot waves and  winds. The main road, Avenida Costera became a fast-moving three foot river of sludge.()

In the 2000s, the drug war in Mexico has had a negative effect on tourism in Acapulco as rival drug traffickers fight each other for the Guerrero coast route that brings drugs from America as well as soldiers that have been fighting the cartels since 2006. A major gun battle between 18 gunmen and soldiers took place in the summer of 2009 in the Old Acapulco seaside area, lasting hours and killing 16 of the gunmen and two soldiers.(() This came after the swine flu outbreak earlier in the year nearly paralyzed the Mexican economy, forcing hotels to give discounts to bring tourists back.( However, hotel occupancy for 2009 was down five percent from the year before.() The death of Arturo Beltran Leyva in December 2009 resulted in infighting among different groups within the Beltran Leyva cartel. () Gang violence continued to plague Acapulco through 2010 and into 2011, most notably with at least 15 dying in drug-related violence on March 13, 2010 and another 15 deaths on January 8, 2011.  Among the first incidents dead were six members of the city police and the brother of an ex-mayor.(Mexico: Guerrero narco-violence breaks grisly record | World War 4 Report) In the second incident the headless bodies of 15 young men were found dumped near the Plaza Senderos shopping center.() On August 20, 2011, Mexican authorities reported that five headless bodies were found in Acapulco, three of which were placed in the citys main tourist area and two of which were cut into multiple pieces. ()

Geography and climate
Forty percent of the municipality is mountainous terrain. Another forty percent is semi flat, and the other twenty percent is flat. Altitude varies from sea level to . The highest peaks are Potrero, San Nicolas and Alto Camarn. There is one major river, the Papagayo, which runs through the municipality, along with a number of arroyos. There are also two small lagoons, Tres Palos and Coyuca. along with a number of thermal springs.

Acapulco features a wet and dry climate. The climate here is hot with distinct wet and dry seasons, more even temperatures between seasons than resorts further north in Mexico, but this vary depending on altitude. The warmest areas are next to the sea where the city is. Tropical Storms and Hurricanes are threat from May through November. The forested area tends to lose leaves during the winter dry season with evergreen pines in the highest elevations. Fauna mostly consists of deer, small mammals, a wide variety of birds of both land and sea as well as marine animals such as turtles.(

dateAugust 2010


Economy
Tourism is the main economic activity of the municipality and most of this is centered on Acapulco Bay. About seventy three percent of the municipalitys population is involved in commerce and most of this is related to tourism and the port. Mining and manufacturing employs less than twenty percent and only about five percent are dedicated to agriculture. Industrial production is mostly limited to bottling, milk products, cement products, ice and energy production. Agricultural products include tomatoes, corn, watermelon, beans, green chili peppers and melons.(

Tourism

Acapulco is one of Mexicos oldest coastal tourist destinations, reaching prominence in the 1950s as the place where Hollywood stars and millionaires vacationed on the beach in an exotic locale.() But nowadays, tourists in Acapulco have been facing problems with local corrupt police who steal money by extortion, and intimidate visitors with threats to jail.()()() The original Acapulco, where hotels owned by personalities such as Weismuller and Wayne are located, is on the northern end of the bay. This is where the boardwalk and main square are and today the area is filled with modern, Mexican style hotels, with discothques and restaurants in walking distance.( This side of the bay is also known as Tradicional or Nautica.

The south end of the bay holds the newer constructions, including the high rise hotels. This area includes Punta Diamante, Puerto Marqus, and stretches from the airport to the Papagayo River which separates it from the older section of town. In this area, no one walks as almost all transportation is by car, limousine or golf cart.(( The older section of town now mostly caters to middle class, almost exclusively Mexican clientele, while the glitzier newer section caters to international visitors and the Mexican upper classes, many of whom never venture into the older, traditional part of town.(( This area also has the higher hotel occupancy rates.((

Acapulcos reputation is that of a high-energy party town, where one can have dinner at midnight, dance until dawn then relax in the daytime on the beach crowded with sexy bodies in bikinis. The nightlife has made this place famous for decades.( From November to April, luxury liners stop here daily and include ships such as the Queen Victoria, the Rotterdam, Harmony as well as all the Princess liner ships.( Despite its international fame, most of Acapulcos visitors are from central Mexico, especially the affluent from Mexico City.((
Acapulco is one of the embarkation ports for the Mexican cruise line Star Cruises.(Ocean Star Cruises - Acapulco, Retrieved 05 August 2011.)

For the Christmas season of 2009, Acapulco received 470,000 visitors, most of whom are Mexican nationals adding 785 million pesos to the economy.  Eighty percent arrive by land and 18 percent by air.()  The area has over 25,000 condominiums, most of which function as second homes for their Mexican owners.( Acapulco is still popular with Mexican celebrities and wealthy, such as Miguel, Plcido Domingo and Olmedo, who maintain homes here.(


While much of the glitz and glamour that made Acapulco famous still remains, from the latter 20th century on, the city has also taken on other less-positive reputations. Some consider it a pass resort, eclipsed by the newer Cancn and San Lucas.( Over the years a number of problems have developed here, especially in the bay and the older sections of the city. The large number of wandering vendors on the beaches such as Tamarindos, who offer everything from newspapers to massages are a recognized problem. It is a bother to tourists who simply want to relax on the beach but the government says is difficult to eradicate as there is a lot of unemployment and poor here.()  Around the city are many shantytowns that cling onto the mountainsides, populated by migrants who have come here looking for work. Prostitution is also common here as well.( In the last decade, drug related violence has caused problems for the tourism trade here.(

Another problem is garbage that has accumulated in the bay. Although 60.65 tons have recently been extracted from the bays of Acapulco and nearby Zihuatanejo, more needs to be done. Most of trash that is cleaned up during the off seasons is done on the beaches and in the waters closest to them. However, the center of the bay is not touched. The reason trash winds up in the bay is that it is common here to throw it in streets, rivers and the bay itself. The most common items cleaned out of the bay are beer bottles and car tires.()

Attractions
Acapulcos main attraction is its nightlife, and has been for many decades.(()  Nightclubs change names and owners frequently. Informal lobby or poolside cocktail bars often offer free live entertainment. In addition, there is the beach bar zone, where younger crowds go. These are located along the Costera road, face the ocean and feature techno or alternative rock. Most are concentrated between the Fiesta Americana and Continental Plaza hotels. These places tend to open earlier and have more informal dress. There is also a jump in this area as well.

File:Cliffdivers in La Quebrada, Acapulco, Guerrero, Mexico.jpg|thumb|upright|Quebrada Cliff Divers.
Another enigmatic attraction at Acapulco are the Quebrada Cliff Divers.( The tradition started in the 1930s when young men casually competed against each other to see who could dive from the highest point into the sea below. Eventually, locals began to ask for tips for those coming to see the men dive.()  Today the divers are professionals,( diving from heights of forty meters into an inlet that is only seven meters wide and four meters deep, after praying first at a shrine to the Virgin of Guadalupe.( On 12 December, the feast day of this Virgin, freestyle cliff divers jump into the sea to honor her. Dives ranges from the simple to the complicated and end with the Ocean of Fire when the sea is lit with gasoline, making a circle of flames which the diver aims for.( The spectacle can be seen from a public area, which charges a small fee or from the Hotel Plaza Las Glorias/El Mirador from its bar or restaurant terrace.()

There are a number of beaches in the Acapulco Bay and the immediate coastline. In the bay proper there are the La Angosta (in the Quebrada), Caleta, Caletilla, Dominguillo, Tlacopanocha, Hornos, Hornitos, Honda, Tamarindo, Condesa, Guitarrn, Icacos, Playuela, Playuelilla and Playa del Secreto. In the adjoining, smaller Bay of Puerto Marqus there is Pichilingue, Las Brisas, and Playa Roqueta. Facing open ocean just northwest of the bays is Pie de la Cuesta and southeast are Playa Revolcadero, Playa Aeromar, Playa Encantada and Barra Vieja. Two lagoons are in the area, Coyuca to the northwest of Acapulco Bay and Tres Palos to the southeast. Both lagoons have mangroves and offer boat tours. Tres Palos also has sea turtle nesting areas which are protected.()

In addition to sunbathing, the beaches around the bay offer a number of services, such as boat rentals, boat tours, horseback riding, scuba diving and other aquatic sports. One popular cruise is from Caletilla Beach to Roqueta Island, which has places to snorkel, have lunch, a small zoo and a lighthouse. There is also an underwater statue of the Virgin of Guadalupe here, created in 1958 by Armando Quesado in memory of a group of divers that died here. Many of the scuba diving tours come to this area as well, where there are sunken ships, sea mountains, and cave rock formations.() Another popular activity is deep sea fishing. The major attraction is sail fishing. Fish caught here have weighed between 89 and 200 pounds. Sailfish are so plentiful that boat captains have been known to bet with a potential customer that if he does not catch anything the trip is free.((

In the old part of the city, there is a traditional main square called the Zcalo with shade trees and lined with cafes and shops. At the north end of the Nuestra Seora de la Soledad cathedral, with blue onion-shaped domes and Byzantine towers. The building was originally constructed as a movie set, but when was later adapted into a church.( Acapulcos most historic building is the San Diego Fort, located east of the main square and originally built in 1616 to protect the city from pirate attacks.( The fort was partially destroyed by the Dutch in the mid 17th century, rebuilt, then destroyed again in 1776 by an earthquake. It was rebuilt again by 1783 and this is the building that can be seen today, unchanged except for renovations done to it in 2000. Parts of the moats remain as well as the five bulwarks and the battlements.()()  Today the fort serves as the Museo Histrico de Acapulco (Acapulco Historical Museum), which shows the ports history from the pre-Hispanic period until independence. There are also temporary exhibits as well.(


The Centro Internacional de Convivencia Infantial or CICI is a sea life and aquatic  park located on Costera Aleman. It offers wave pools, water slides and water toboggans. There are also dolphin shows daily and a swim with dolphins program. The center mostly caters to children.(( Another place popular with children is the Parque Papagayo which is a large family park which has life-sized replicas of a Spanish galleon and the space shuttle Columbia, three artificial lakes, aviary, skating rink, rides, go-karts and more.(

The Dolores Olmedo House is located in the traditional downtown of Acapulco and is noted for the murals by Rivera that adorn it. Olmedo and Rivera had been friend since Olmedo was a child and Rivera spent the last two years of his life here. During that time, he painted nearly nonstop and created the outside walls with tile mosaics, featuring Aztec deities such as Quetzalcoatl. The interior of the home is covered in murals. The home is not a museum, so only the outside murals are able to be seen by the public.(

There is a small museum called Casa de la Mscara (House of Masks) which is dedicated to masks, most of them from Mexico but there are examples from many parts of the world. The collection contains about one thousand examples and are divided into seven rooms called Masks of the World, Mexico across History, The Huichols and the Jaguar, Alebrijes and Dances of Guerrero, Devils and Death, Identity and Fantasy, and Afro-Indian masks.(
The Botanical Garden of Acapulco is a tropical garden located on lands owned by the Universidad Loyola del Pacifico. Most of the plants here are native to the region, and many are in danger of extinction, such as the mexicana or purple stick tree.(

The annual French Festival takes place throughout Acapulco city and offers a multitude of events that cement cultural links between Mexico and France. The main features are a fashion show and gourmet food fair. The Cinpolis Galeras Diana and the Teatro Juan Ruz de Alarcn show French and French literary figures give talks on their specialised subjects. Even some of the local nightclubs will feature French DJs.()  Other festivals celebrated here include  Carnival, the feast of San Isidro Labrador on 15 May and a crafts and livestock fair called the Nao de China in November.(

There are a number of golf courses in Acapulco including the Acapulco Princess and the Pierre Marqus course, the latter designed by Trent Jones in 1972 for the World Cup Golf Tournament. The Mayan Palace course was designed by Guericia and an economical course called the Club de Golf Acapulco is near the convention center.  The most exclusive course is that of the Tres Vidas Golf Club, designed by von Hagge. It is located next to the ocean and is home to flocks of ducks and other birds.(

Acapulco also has a bullring, called the Plaza de Toros, near Caletilla Beach. The season runs during the winter and is called the Fiesta Brava.(



Spring break
Over 100,000 American teenagers and young adults travel to resort areas and balnearios throughout Mexico over break each year.() The main reason students head to Mexico is the 18 year old drinking age (versus 21 for the United States), something that has been marketed by tour operators along with the sun and ocean. This has become attractive since the 1990s, especially since more traditional spring break places such as Beach, Florida have become restrictive on drinking and other behaviors. This has pushed spring break visitation to various parts of Mexico, with Acapulco as one of the top destinations.()


In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Cancn had been favored at the spring break destination of choice. However, Cancun has taken some steps to control the reckless behavior associated with the event, and students have been looking for someplace new. This has led many more to choose Acapulco, in spite of the fact that the flight is longer and more expensive than to Cancun for many travelers. Many are attracted by the glitzy hotels on the south side and Acapulcos famous nightlife.() In 2008, 22,500 students came to Acapulco for spring break. Hotels did not get that many in 2009, mostly due to the economic situation in the United States,() and partially because of scares of drug-related violence.() MTV will transmit special programming from Acapulco in 2010.()

In February 2009, the US State Department issued a travel alert directed at college students planning spring break trips to Acapulco.(http://travel.state.gov/travel/cis_pa_tw/pa/pa_3028.html ) The warninga result of violent activity springing from Mexicos drug cartel debacletook college campuses by storm, with some schools going so far as to warn their students about the risks of travel to Mexico over spring break.  The New York Times tracked the travels of another Penn student on spring break in Acapulco just a week after the dissemination of the email, while Bill OReilly devoted a segment of his show, OReilly Factor, to urge students to stay away from Acapulco.()  In June 2009 a number of incidents occurred between the drug cartel and the government. These included coordinated attacks on police headquarters and open battles in the streets involving large-caliber weapons and grenades.()  However, no incidents of violence against spring breakers were reported.

Transportation

From the U.S., many airlines now fly to Acapulco Airport year-round. While in the city, there are many buses and taxi services one can take to get from place to place, but most of the locals choose to walk to their destinations. However, an important mode of transportation is the government subsidized Colectivo cab system. These cabs cost 10 pesos per person to ride, but they are not private. The driver will pick up more passengers as long as seats are available, and will transport them to their destination based on first come first served rules. The colectivos each travel a designated area of the city, the three main ones being Costera, Colosio, Coloso, or a mixture of the three. Coloso cabs mainly travel to old Acapulco. Colosio cabs travel through most of the tourist area of Acapulco. Costera cabs drive up and down the coast of Acapulco, which is where most of the hotels for visitors are, but also includes some of old Acapulco. Where a driver will take you is partly up to his choice. Some are willing to travel to the other designated areas, especially during slow periods of the day.

The bus system is highly complex, and can be rather confusing to an outsider. As far as transportation goes, it is the cheapest form other than walking in Acapulco. The most expensive buses have conditioning, while the cheaper buses do not. For tourists, the Acapulco city government has established a system of yellow buses with Acapulco! painted on the side of them. These buses are not for tourists only, but are certainly the nicest and most uniform of the bus systems. These buses travel the tourist section of Acapulco, driving up and down the coast. There are buses with specific routes and destinations, generally written on their windshields or shouted out by a barker riding in the front seat. Perhaps the most unusual thing about the privately operated buses is the fact that they are all highly decorated and personalized, with decaling and home made interior designs that range from book scenes, to adult themes, and even to Kitty themes.

Government


As the seat of a municipality, the city of Acapulco is the government authority for over 700 other communities,( which together have a territory of 1,880.60 km2.( This municipality borders the municipalities of Chilpancingo, Juan R Escudero (Tierra Colorada), San Marcos, de Bentez with the Pacific Ocean to the south.

The metropolitan area is made up of the municipalities of Acapulco de Jurez and Coyuca de Benitez. The area has a population (as of 2005) of 786,830.()

See also

* (municipality)
* gold

References


 External links 

* Official city website
* Acapulco Then and Now  slideshow by magazine











zh-min-nan:Acapulco

be-x-old:
bg:
ca:Acapulco
cs:Acapulco
cy:Acapulco
da:Acapulco
de:Acapulco
et:Acapulco
de Jurez
eo:Akapulko
eu:Acapulco
fr:Acapulco
gl:Acapulco
ko:
hr:Acapulco
id:Acapulco
it:Acapulco
he:
kl:Acapulco
ka:
Guerrero
mrj:
lt:Akapulkas
lmo:Acapulco
hu:Acapulco
ml:
nah:caplco
(Guerrero)
ja:
no:Acapulco
nn:Acapulco
pms:Acapulco
pl:Acapulco
pt:Acapulco
Guerrero
ru:
simple:Acapulco
sk:Acapulco
sl:Acapulco
sr:
sh:Acapulco
fi:Acapulco
sv:Acapulco
tl:Acapulco
tr:Acapulco
uk:
vo:Acapulco
war:Acapulco
zh:</eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
