<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>904</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>Aluminium</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>


Aluminium or aluminum is a silvery white member of the group of elements. It has the symbol Al, and its number is 13. It is not soluble in water under normal circumstances.
Aluminium is the third most abundant element (after oxygen and silicon), and the most abundant metal, in the Earths crust. It makes up about 8% by weight of the Earths solid surface. Aluminium metal is too reactive chemically to occur natively. Instead, it is found combined in over 270 different minerals.() The chief ore of aluminium is bauxite.

Aluminium is remarkable for the metals low density and for its ability to resist corrosion due to the phenomenon of passivation. Structural components made from aluminium and its alloys are vital to the aerospace industry and are important in other areas of transportation and structural materials. The most useful compounds of aluminium, at least on a weight basis, are the oxides and sulfates.

Despite its prevalence in the environment, aluminium salts are not known to be used by any form of life. In keeping with its pervasiveness, it is well tolerated by plants and animals.(  Because of its prevalence, potential biological roles, beneficial and otherwise, for aluminium compounds are of continuing interest.

 Characteristics 


 Physical 
Aluminium is a soft, durable, lightweight, ductile and malleable metal with appearance ranging from silvery to dull gray, depending on the surface roughness. Aluminium is nonmagnetic and does not easily ignite. A fresh film of aluminium film serves as a good reflector (approximately 92%) of light and an excellent reflector (as much as 98%) of medium and far infrared radiation. The yield strength of pure aluminium is 711 MPa, while alloys have yield strengths ranging from 200 MPa to 600 MPa.() Aluminium has about one-third the density and stiffness of steel. It is easily machined, cast, drawn and extruded.

Corrosion resistance can be excellent due to a thin surface layer of oxide that forms when the metal is exposed to air, effectively preventing further oxidation. The strongest aluminium alloys are less corrosion resistant due to galvanic reactions with alloyed copper.( This corrosion resistance is also often greatly reduced when many aqueous salts are present, particularly in the presence of dissimilar metals.

Aluminium atoms are arranged in a face-centered cubic (fcc) structure. Aluminium has a energy of approximately 200 mJ/m2.()

Aluminium is one of the few metals that retain full silvery reflectance in finely powdered form, making it an important component of silver-colored paints. Aluminium mirror finish has the highest reflectance of any metal in the 200400 nm (UV) and the 3,00010,000 nm (far IR) regions; in the 400700 nm visible range it is slightly outperformed by tin and silver and in the 7003000 (near IR) by silver, gold, and copper.()

Aluminium is a good thermal and conductor, having 59% the conductivity of copper, both thermal and electrical. Aluminium is capable of being a superconductor, with a superconducting critical temperature of 1.2 Kelvin and a critical magnetic field of about 100 gauss (10 milliteslas).()

 Creation 
Stable aluminium is created when hydrogen fuses with magnesium either in large stars or in supernovae.()

 Isotopes 

Aluminium has many known isotopes, whose mass numbers range from 21 to 42; however, only 27Al (isotope) and 26Al (radioactive isotope, t1/2  7.2105 y) occur naturally. 27Al has a natural abundance above 99.9%. 26Al is produced from argon in the atmosphere by spallation caused by cosmic-ray protons. Aluminium isotopes have found practical application in dating marine sediments, manganese nodules, glacial ice, quartz in rock exposures, and meteorites. The ratio of 26Al to 10Be has been used to study the role of transport, deposition, sediment storage, burial times, and erosion on 105 to 106 year time scales.() Cosmogenic 26Al was first applied in studies of the Moon and meteorites. Meteoroid fragments, after departure from their parent bodies, are exposed to intense cosmic-ray bombardment during their travel through space, causing substantial 26Al production. After falling to Earth, atmospheric shielding drastically reduces 26Al production, and its decay can then be used to determine the meteorites terrestrial age. Meteorite research has also shown that 26Al was relatively abundant at the time of formation of our planetary system. Most meteorite scientists believe that the energy released by the decay of 26Al was responsible for the melting and differentiation of some asteroids after their formation 4.55 billion years ago.()

 Natural occurrence 
In the crust, aluminium is the most abundant (8.3% by weight) metallic element and the third most abundant of all elements (after oxygen and silicon).(, p. 217) Because of its strong affinity to oxygen, it is almost never found in the elemental state; instead it is found in oxides or silicates. Feldspars, the most common group of minerals in the Earths crust, are aluminosilicates. Native aluminium metal can be found as a minor phase in low oxygen fugacity environments, such as the interiors of certain volcanoes.() Native aluminium has been reported in seeps in the northeastern slope of the China Sea and Chen et al. (2011)( have proposed a theory of its origin as resulting by reduction from tetrahydroxoaluminate Al(OH)4- to metallic aluminium by bacteria.(Chen Z., Huang C.-Y., Zhao M., Yan W., Chien C.-W., Chen M., Yang H., Machiyama H. & Lin S. (2011). Characteristics and possible origin of native aluminum in cold seep sediments from the northeastern South China Sea. of Asian Earth Sciences 40(1): 363-370. doi:doi:10.1016/j.jseaes.2010.06.006.)

It also occurs in the minerals beryl, cryolite, garnet, spinel and turquoise. Impurities in Al2O3, such as chromium or iron yield the gemstones ruby and sapphire, respectively.

Although aluminium is an extremely common and widespread element, the common aluminium minerals are not economic sources of the metal. Almost all metallic aluminium is produced from the ore bauxite (AlOx(OH)3-2x). Bauxite occurs as a weathering product of low iron and silica bedrock in tropical climatic conditions.() Large deposits of bauxite occur in Australia, Brazil, Guinea and Jamaica and the primary mining areas for the ore are in Australia, Brazil, China, India, Guinea,  Indonesia, Jamaica, Russia and Surinam. 


 Production and refinement 

Although aluminium is the most abundant metallic element in the Earths crust, it is never found in free, metallic form (with above mentioned exceptions).

Aluminium forms strong bonds with oxygen. Compared to most other metals, it is difficult to extract from ore, such as bauxite, due to the energy required to reduce aluminium oxide (Al2O3). For example, direct reduction with carbon, as is used to produce iron, is not chemically possible, since aluminium is a stronger reducing agent than carbon. There is an indirect carbothermic reduction possible by using carbon and Al2O3, which forms an intermediate Al4C3 and this can further yield aluminium metal at a temperature of 19002000C. This process is still under development. This process costs less energy and yields less CO2 than the process, the major industrial process for aluminium extraction.() Aluminium oxide has a melting point of about . Therefore, it must be extracted by electrolysis. In this process, the aluminium oxide is dissolved in molten cryolite with calcium fluoride and then reduced to the pure metal. The operational temperature of the reduction cells is around . Cryolite is found as a mineral in Greenland, but in industrial use it has been replaced by a synthetic substance. Cryolite is a chemical compound of aluminium and sodium fluorides: (Na3AlF6). The aluminium oxide (a white powder) is obtained by refining bauxite in the process of Bayer. (Previously, the process was the predominant refining technology.)

The electrolytic process replaced the process, which involved the reduction of anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium. Both of the electrodes used in the electrolysis of aluminium oxide are carbon. Once the refined alumina is dissolved in the electrolyte, its ions are free to move around. The reaction at the cathode is:

: Al3+ + 3 e  Al

Here the aluminium ion is being reduced. The aluminium metal then sinks to the bottom and is tapped off, usually cast into large blocks called aluminium billets for further processing.

At the anode, oxygen is formed:
: 2 O2  O2 + 4 e

To some extent, the carbon anode is degraded by the oxygen. The anodes in a reduction cell must therefore be replaced regularly, since they are consumed in the process. The cathodes do erode, mainly due to electrochemical processes and metal movement. After five to ten years, depending on the current used in the electrolysis, a cell has to be rebuilt because of cathode wear.


Aluminium electrolysis with the Hall-Hroult process consumes a lot of energy, but alternative processes were always found to be less viable economically and/or ecologically. The worldwide average specific energy consumption is approximately 150.5 kilowatt-hours per kilogram of aluminium produced (52 to 56 MJ/kg). The most modern smelters achieve approximately 12.8 kWh/kg (46.1 MJ/kg). (Compare this to the of reaction, 31 MJ/kg, and the free energy of reaction, 29 MJ/kg.) Reduction line currents for older technologies are typically 100 to 200 kiloamperes; state-of-the-art smelters operate at about 350 kA. Trials have been reported with 500 kA cells.

The Hall-Heroult process produces aluminium with a purity of above 99%. Further purification can be done by the process. The process involves the electrolysis of molten aluminium with a sodium, barium and aluminium fluoride electrolyte. The resulting aluminium has a purity of 99.99%.(William B. Frank, Warren E. Haupin, Robert K. Dawless, Douglas A. Granger, Maurice W. Wei, Kenneth J. Calhoun, Thomas B. Bonney
Aluminum in Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2009, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. )()

Electric power represents about 20% to 40% of the cost of producing aluminium, depending on the location of the smelter. Aluminium production consumes roughly 5% of electricity generated in the U.S.( Smelters tend to be situated where electric power is both plentiful and inexpensive, such as the Arab Emirates with excess natural gas supplies and Iceland and Norway with energy generated from renewable sources. The worlds largest smelters of alumina are Peoples Republic of China, Russia, and Quebec and Columbia in Canada.()()()



In 2005, the Peoples Republic of China was the top producer of aluminium with almost a one-fifth world share, followed by Russia, Canada, and the USA, reports the Geological Survey.

Over the last 50 years, Australia has become a major producer of bauxite ore and a major producer and exporter of alumina (before being overtaken by China in 2007).(() Australia produced 62 million tonnes of bauxite in 2005. The Australian deposits have some refining problems, some being high in silica, but have the advantage of being shallow and relatively easy to mine.()

 Recycling 
File:41 ALU Recycling Code.svg|150px|thumb|Aluminium code

Aluminium is theoretically 100% recyclable without any loss of its natural qualities. According to the Resource Panels Stocks in Society report, the global per capita stock of aluminium in use in society (i.e. in cars, buildings, electronics etc.) is 80kg. Much of this is in more-developed countries (350500kg per capita) rather than less-developed countries (35kg per capita). Knowing the per capita stocks and their approximate lifespans is important for planning recycling.

Recovery of the metal via recycling has become an important facet of the aluminium industry. Recycling was a low-profile activity until the late 1960s, when the growing use of aluminium cans brought it to the public awareness.

Recycling involves melting the scrap, a process that requires only 5% of the energy used to produce aluminium from ore, though a significant part (up to 15% of the input material) is lost as dross (ash-like oxide).() The dross can undergo a further process to extract aluminium.

In Europe aluminium experiences high rates of recycling, ranging from 42% of beverage cans, 85% of construction materials and 95% of transport vehicles.()

Recycled aluminium is known as secondary aluminium, but maintains the same physical properties as primary aluminium. Secondary aluminium is produced in a wide range of formats and is employed in 80% of alloy injections. Another important use is for extrusion.

White dross from primary aluminium production and from secondary recycling operations still contains useful quantities of aluminium that can be extracted industrially.() The process produces aluminium billets, together with a highly complex waste material. This waste is difficult to manage. It reacts with water, releasing a mixture of gases (including, among others, hydrogen, acetylene, and ammonia), which spontaneously ignites on contact with air;() contact with damp air results in the release of copious quantities of ammonia gas. Despite these difficulties, the waste has found use as a filler in asphalt and concrete.(Dunster, A.M., Moulinier, F., Abbott, B., Conroy, A., Adams, K., Widyatmoko, D.(2005). Added value of using new industrial waste streams as secondary aggregates in both concrete and asphalt. DTI/WRAP Aggregates Research Programme STBF 13/15C. The Waste and Resources Action Programme.)

 Compounds 
 Oxidation state +3 
The vast majority of compounds, including all Al-containing minerals and all commercially significant aluminium compounds, feature aluminium in the oxidation state 3+. The coordination number of such compounds varies, but generally Al3+ is six-coordinate or tetracoordinate. Almost all compounds of aluminium(III) are colorless.(

 Halides 
All four trihalides are well known. Unlike the structures of the three heavier trihalides, fluoride (AlF3) features six-coordinate Al. The octahedral coordination environment for AlF3 is related to the compactness of fluoride ion, six of which can fit around the small Al3+ centre. AlF3 sublimes (with cracking) at . With heavier halides, the coordination numbers are lower. The other trihalides are dimeric or polymeric with tetrahedral Al centers. These materials are prepared by treating aluminium metal with the halogen, although other methods exist. Acidification of the oxides or hydroxides affords hydrates. In aqueous solution, the halides often form mixtures, generally containing six-coordinate Al centres, which are feature both halide and aquo ligands. When aluminium and fluoride are together in aqueous solution, they readily form complex ions such as , , and . In the case of chloride, polyaluminium clusters are formed such as Al13O4(OH)24(H2O)127+.

 Oxide and hydroxides 
Aluminium forms one stable oxide, known by its mineral name corundum.  Sapphire and ruby are impure corundum contaminated with trace amounts of other metals. The two oxide-hydroxides (AlO(OH) are boehmite and diaspore. There are three trihydroxides: bayerite, gibbsite, and nordstrandite, which differ in their crystalline structure (polymorphs). Most are produced from ores by a variety of wet processes using acid and base. Heating the hydroxides leads to formation of corundrum. These materials are of central importance to the production of aluminium and are themselves extremely useful.

 Carbide, nitride, and related materials 
carbide (Al4C3) is made by heating a mixture of the elements above . The pale yellow crystals consist of tetrahedral aluminium centres. It reacts with water or dilute acids to give methane. The acetylide, Al2(C2)3, is made by passing acetylene over heated aluminium.

nitride (AlN) is the only nitride known for aluminium. Unlike the oxides it features tetrahedral Al centres. It can be made from the elements at . It is air-stable material with a usefully high conductivity. phosphide (AlP) is made similarly, and hydrolyses to give phosphine:
: AlP  +  3 H2O      Al(OH)3  +  PH3

 Organoaluminium compounds and related hydrides 

image:Trimethylaluminium-3D-balls.png|thumb|left|220px|Structure of trimethylaluminium, a compound that features five-coordinate carbon.
A variety of compounds of empirical formula AlR3 and AlR1.5Cl1.5 exist.(Elschenbroich, C. Organometallics (2006) Wiley-VCH: Weinheim. ISBN 978-3-29390-6) These species usually feature tetrahedral Al centres, e.g. trimethylaluminium has the formula Al2(CH3)6 (see figure). With large organic groups, triorganoaluminium exist as three-coordinate monomers, such as triisobutylaluminium. Such compounds are widely used in industrial chemistry, despite the fact that they are often highly pyrophoric. Few analogues exist between organoaluminium and organoboron compounds except for large organic groups.

The important aluminium hydride is aluminium hydride (LiAlH4), which is used in as a reducing agent in chemistry. It can be produced from hydride and aluminium trichloride:
: 4 LiH  +  AlCl3      LiAlH4  +  3 LiCl
Several useful derivatives of LiAlH4 are known, e.g. Sodium bis(2-methoxyethoxy)dihydridoaluminate. The simplest hydride, hydride or alane, remains a laboratory curiosity. It is a polymer with the formula (AlH3)n, in contrast to the corresponding boron hydride with the formula (BH3)2.

 Oxidation states +1 and 2+ 
Although the great majority of aluminium compounds feature Al3+ centres, compounds with lower oxidation states are known and sometime of significance as precursors to the Al3+ species.

 Aluminium(I) 
AlF, AlCl and AlBr exist in the gaseous phase when the tri-halide is heated with aluminium. The composition AlI is unstable at room temperature with respect to the triiodide:(
: 3 AlI   AlI3  +  2 Al
A stable derivative of aluminium monoiodide is the cyclic adduct formed with triethylamine, Al4I4(NEt3)4. Also of theoretical interest but only of fleeting existence are Al2O and Al2S is made by heating the normal oxide, Al2O3, with silicon at  in a vacuum.() Such materials quickly disproportionates to the starting materials.

 Aluminium(II) 
Very simple Al(II) compounds are invoked or observed in the reactions of Al metal with oxidants. For example, monoxide, AlO, has been detected in the gas phase after explosion() and in stellar absorption spectra.()  More thoroughly investigated are compounds of the formula R4Al2 where R is a large organic ligand.(Werner Uhl, Organoelement Compounds Possessing Al---Al, Ga---Ga, In---In, and Tl---Tl Single Bonds Advances in Organometallic Chemistry Volume 51, 2004, Pages 53-108. )

 Analysis 
The presence of aluminium can be detected in qualitative analysis using aluminon.

 Applications 
 General use 
Aluminium is the most widely used non-ferrous metal.() Global production of aluminium in 2005 was 31.9 million tonnes. It exceeded that of any other metal except iron (837.5 million tonnes).() Forecast for 2012 is 4245 million tons, driven by rising Chinese output.(Rising Chinese Costs to Support Aluminum Prices Bloomberg News, November 23, 2009) 

Aluminium is almost always alloyed, which markedly improves its mechanical properties, especially when tempered. For example, the common foils and beverage cans are alloys of 92% to 99% aluminium.() The main alloying agents are copper, zinc, magnesium, manganese, and silicon (e.g., duralumin) and the levels of these other metals are in the range of a few percent by weight.(J. Paul Lyle, Douglas A. Granger, Robert E. Sanders, Aluminum Alloys Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2005, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. )
File:aluminumfoil.jpg|thumb|Household foil
A40 Roadster ca 1951.jpg|thumb|Aluminium-bodied Austin A40 Sports (circa 1951)

Some of the many uses for aluminium metal are in:
* Transportation (automobiles, aircraft, trucks, cars, marine vessels, bicycles, etc.) as sheet, tube, castings, etc.
* Packaging (cans, foil, etc.)
* Construction (windows, doors, siding, building wire, etc.)
* A wide range of household items, from utensils to bats, watches.()
* Street lighting poles, sailing ship masts, poles, etc.
* Outer shells of consumer electronics, also cases for equipment e.g. photographic equipment.
* transmission lines for power distribution
* steel and Alnico magnets
* Super purity aluminium (SPA, 99.980% to 99.999% Al), used in electronics and CDs.
* sinks for electronic appliances such as transistors and CPUs.
* Substrate material of copper clad laminates used in high brightness lighting.
* Powdered aluminium is used in paint, and in pyrotechnics such as rocket fuels and thermite.
* Aluminium can be reacted with hydrochloric acid or with hydroxide to produce hydrogen gas.
* A variety of countries, including France, Italy, Poland, Finland, Romania, Israel, and the former Yugoslavia, have issued coins struck in aluminium or aluminium-copper alloys.(Worlds coinage uses 24 chemical elements, 2 part series, World Coin News (February 17, 1992 and March 2, 1992))
* Some guitar models sports aluminium diamond plates on the surface of the instruments, usually either chrome or black. Guitars and Bean are both known for having produced guitars with necks made of aluminium, which gives the instrument a very distinct sound.
* Sustainability of Aluminium in Buildings

Relatively pure aluminium is rarely encountered -  only when corrosion resistance and/or workability is more important than strength or hardness. A thin layer of aluminium can be deposited onto a flat surface by vapour deposition or (very infrequently) vapour deposition or other chemical means to form coatings and mirrors.

 Aluminium compounds 
Because aluminium is abundant and most of its derivative exhibit low toxicity, the compounds of aluminium enjoy wide and sometimes large-scale applications.

 Alumina 

oxide (Al2O3) and the associated oxy-hydroxides and trihydroxides are produced or extracted from minerals on a large scale. The great majority of this material is converted to metallic aluminium. About 10% of the production capacity is used for other applications. A major use is as an absorbent, for example alumina will remove water from hydrocarbons, to enable subsequent processes that are poisoned by moisture. Aluminium oxides are common catalysts for industrial processes, e.g. the process for converting sulfide to sulfur in refineries and for the alkylation of amines. Many industrial catalysts are supported, meaning generally that an expensive catalyst (e.g., platinum) is dispersed over a high surface area material such as alumina. Being a very hard material (hardness 9), alumina is widely used as an abrasive and the production of applications that exploit its inertness, e.g., in pressure sodium lamps.

 Sulfates 
Several sulfates of aluminium find applications.  sulfate (Al2(SO4)3(H2O)18) is produced on the annual scale of several billions of kilograms. About half of the production is consumed in treatment. The next major application is in the manufacture of paper. It is also used as a mordant, in extinguisher, as a food additive, in fireproofing, and in leather tanning. Aluminium ammonium sulfate (Al(NH4)(SO4)2)(H2O)12, also called alum, is used as a mordant and in leather tanning.(Otto Helmboldt, L. Keith Hudson, Chanakya Misra, Karl Wefers, Wolfgang Heck, Hans Stark, Max Danner, Norbert Rsch Aluminum Compounds, Inorganic in Ullmanns Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, 2007, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim. )  Aluminium potassium sulfate (Al(K)(SO4)2)(H2O)12 is used similarly. The consumption of both alums is declining.

 Chlorides 
chloride (AlCl3) is used in petroleum refining and in the production of synthetic rubber and polymers.
Although it has a similar name, chlorohydrate has fewer and very different applications, e.g. as an hardening agent and an antiperspirant. It is an intermediate in the production of aluminium metal.

 Niche compounds 
Given the scale of aluminium compounds, a small scale application could still involve thousands of tons. One of the many compounds used at this intermediate level include acetate, a salt used in solution as an astringent.  borate (Al2O3 B2O3) is used in the production of glass and ceramics.  fluorosilicate (Al2(SiF6)3) is used in the production of synthetic gemstones, glass and ceramic. phosphate (AlPO4) is used in the manufacture: of glass and ceramic, pulp and paper products, cosmetics, paints and varnishes and in making dental cement.  hydroxide (Al(OH)3) is used as an antacid, as a mordant, in water purification, in the manufacture of glass and ceramic and in the waterproofing of fabrics. aluminium hydride is a powerful reducing agent used in chemistry. Organoaluminiums are used as acids and cocatalysts. For example, methylaluminoxane is a cocatalyst for Ziegler-Natta olefin polymerization to produce polymers such as polyethene.



 Aluminium alloys in structural applications 
File:Aluminium foam.jpg|thumb|foam

Aluminium alloys with a wide range of properties are used in engineering structures. Alloy systems are classified by a number system (ANSI) or by names indicating their main alloying constituents (DIN and ISO).

The strength and durability of aluminium alloys vary widely, not only as a result of the components of the specific alloy, but also as a result of heat treatments and manufacturing processes. A lack of knowledge of these aspects has from time to time led to improperly designed structures and gained aluminium a bad reputation.

One important structural limitation of aluminium alloys is their fatigue strength. Unlike steels, aluminium alloys have no well-defined limit, meaning that fatigue failure eventually occurs, under even very small cyclic loadings. This implies that engineers must assess these loads and design for a fixed life rather than an infinite life.

Another important property of aluminium alloys is their sensitivity to heat.
Workshop procedures involving heating are complicated by the fact that aluminium, unlike steel, melts without first glowing red. Forming operations where a torch is used therefore require some expertise, since no visual signs reveal how close the material is to melting. Aluminium alloys, like all structural alloys, also are subject to internal stresses following heating operations such as welding and casting. The problem with aluminium alloys in this regard is their low point, which make them more susceptible to distortions from thermally induced stress relief. Controlled stress relief can be done during manufacturing by heat-treating the parts in an oven, followed by gradual coolingin effect annealing the stresses.

The low melting point of aluminium alloys has not precluded their use in rocketry; even for use in constructing combustion chambers where gases can reach 3500 K. The Agena upper stage engine used a regeneratively cooled aluminium design for some parts of the nozzle, including the thermally critical throat region.

Another alloy of some value is bronze (CuAl5).

 History 
File:Eros-piccadilly-circus.jpg|thumb|right|The statue of the Anteros (commonly mistaken for either The Angel of Christian Charity or Eros) in Circus, London, was made in 1893 and is one of the first statues to be cast in aluminium.

Ancient Greeks and Romans used aluminium salts as dyeing mordants and as astringents for dressing wounds; alum is still used as a styptic. In 1761, de Morveau suggested calling the base alum alumine. In 1808, Davy identified the existence of a metal base of alum, which he at first termed alumium and later aluminum (see etymology section, below).

The metal was first produced in 1825 (in an impure form) by Danish physicist and chemist Christian rsted. He reacted anhydrous chloride with potassium amalgam and yielded a lump of metal looking similar to tin.()
Whler was aware of these experiments and cited them, but after redoing the experiments of rsted he concluded that this metal was pure potassium. He conducted a similar experiment in 1827 by mixing anhydrous aluminium chloride with potassium and yielded aluminium.( Whler is generally credited with isolating aluminium (Latin alumen, alum), but also rsted can be listed as its discoverer.() Further, Berthier discovered aluminium in bauxite ore and successfully extracted it.() Frenchman Etienne Sainte-Claire Deville improved Whlers method in 1846, and described his improvements in a book in 1859, chief among these being the substitution of sodium for the considerably more expensive potassium.(Etienne Sainte-Claire Deville De laluminium, ses proprits, sa fabrication (Paris, 1859)) Deville likely also conceived the idea of the electrolysis of aluminium oxide dissolved in cryolite; Martin Hall and Paul Hroult might have developed the more practical process after Deville.

Before the process was developed in the late 1880s, aluminium was exceedingly difficult to extract from its various ores. This made pure aluminium more valuable than gold.() Bars of aluminium were exhibited at the Exposition Universelle of 1855.() Napoleon III, Emperor of France, is reputed to have given a banquet where the most honoured guests were given aluminium utensils, while the others made do with gold.()(ChemMatters October 1990 p. 14.)

Aluminium was selected as the material to be used for the 100 ounce (2.8 kg) capstone of the Monument in 1884, a time when one ounce (30 grams) cost the daily wage of a common worker on the project;() The capstone, which was set in place on December 6, 1884, in an elaborate dedication ceremony, was the largest single piece of aluminium cast at the time, when aluminium was as expensive as silver.()

The Cowles companies supplied aluminium alloy in quantity in the States and England using smelters like the furnace of Wilhelm Siemens by 1886.( and  and ) Martin Hall of Ohio in the U.S. and Hroult of France independently developed the Hall-Hroult electrolytic process that made extracting aluminium from minerals cheaper and is now the principal method used worldwide. Halls process,() in 1888 with the financial backing of E. Hunt, started the Pittsburgh Reduction Company today known as Alcoa. Hroults process was in production by 1889 in Switzerland at Aluminium Industrie, now Alcan, and at Aluminium, now Group and Alcoa, by 1896 in Scotland.()

By 1895, the metal was being used as a building material as far away as Sydney, Australia in the dome of the Chief Secretarys Building.

Many navies have used an aluminium superstructure for their vessels; the 1975 fire aboard USS Belknap that gutted her aluminium superstructure, as well as observation of battle damage to British ships during the War, led to many navies switching to all steel superstructures. The Arleigh Burke class was the first such U.S. ship, being constructed entirely of steel.

wire was once widely used for domestic electrical wiring. Owing to corrosion-induced failures, a number of fires resulted. This discontinuation thus illustrates one failed application of the otherwise highly useful metal.

In 2008, the price of aluminium peaked at $1.45/lb in July but dropped to $0.70/lb by December.(Aluminum prices.)

 Etymology 
Two variants of the metals name are in current use, aluminium and aluminum (besides the obsolete alumium).
The Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) adopted aluminium as the standard international name for the element in 1990 but, three years later, recognized aluminum as an acceptable variant. Hence their periodic table includes both.(IUPAC Periodic Table of the Elements.) IUPAC prefers the use of aluminium in its internal publications, although nearly as many IUPAC publications use the spelling aluminum.(IUPAC Web site publication search for aluminum.)

Most countries use the spelling aluminium. In the United States, the spelling aluminum predominates.((Bremner, John Words on Words: A Dictionary for Writers and Others Who Care about Words, pp. 2223. ISBN 0-231-04493-3.) The Oxford Dictionary prefers aluminum, whereas the Australian Dictionary prefers aluminium. In 1926, the Chemical Society officially decided to use aluminum in its publications; American dictionaries typically label the spelling aluminium as a British variant.

The name aluminium derives from its status as a base of alum. It is borrowed from French; its ultimate source, alumen, in turn is a Latin word that literally means bitter salt.()

The earliest citation given in the English Dictionary for any word used as a name for this element is alumium, which British chemist and inventor Davy employed in 1808 for the metal he was trying to isolate electrolytically from the mineral alumina. The citation is from the journal Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: Had I been so fortunate as to have obtained more certain evidences on this subject, and to have procured the metallic substances I was in search of, I should have proposed for them the names of silicium, alumium, zirconium, and glucium.(alumium, Oxford English Dictionary. Ed. J.A. Simpson and E.S.C. Weiner, second edition Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989. OED Online Oxford University Press. Accessed 29 October 2006. Citation is listed as 1808 SIR H. DAVY in Phil. Trans. XCVIII. 353. The ellipsis in the quotation is as it appears in the OED citation.)()

Davy settled on aluminum by the time he published his 1812 book Chemical Philosophy: This substance appears to contain a peculiar metal, but as yet Aluminum has not been obtained in a perfectly free state, though alloys of it with other metalline substances have been procured sufficiently distinct to indicate the probable nature of alumina.() But the same year, an anonymous contributor to the Review, a British political-literary journal, in a review of Davys book, objected to aluminum and proposed the name aluminium, for so we shall take the liberty of writing the word, in preference to aluminum, which has a less classical sound.()

The -ium suffix conformed to the precedent set in other newly discovered elements of the time: potassium, sodium, magnesium, calcium, and strontium (all of which Davy isolated himself). Nevertheless, -um spellings for elements were not unknown at the time, as for example platinum, known to Europeans since the century, molybdenum, discovered in 1778, and tantalum, discovered in 1802. The -um suffix is consistent with the universal spelling alumina for the oxide, as lanthana is the oxide of lanthanum, and magnesia, ceria, and thoria are the oxides of magnesium, cerium, and thorium respectively.

The spelling used throughout the 19th century by most U.S. chemists was aluminium, but common usage is less clear.(, In the USA, the position was more complicated. Noah Websters Dictionary of 1828 has only aluminum, though the standard spelling among US chemists throughout most of the nineteenth century was aluminium; it was the preferred version in The Century Dictionary of 1889 and is the only spelling given in the Webster Unabridged Dictionary of 1913.) The aluminum spelling is used in the Dictionary of 1828. In his advertising handbill for his new electrolytic method of producing the metal 1892, Charles Martin Hall used the -um spelling, despite his constant use of the -ium spelling in all the patents( he filed between 1886 and 1903.() It has consequently been suggested that the spelling reflects an easier to pronounce word with one fewer syllable, or that the spelling on the flier was a mistake. Halls domination of production of the metal ensured that the spelling aluminum became the standard in North America; the Webster Unabridged Dictionary of 1913, though, continued to use the -ium version.

 Health concerns 




Despite its natural abundance, aluminium has no known function in biology. It is remarkably nontoxic, aluminium sulfate having an LD50 of 6207 mg/kg (oral, mouse), which corresponds to 500 grams for a 80 kg person.( Despite the extremely low acute toxicity, the health effects of aluminium are of interest in view of the widespread occurrence of the element in the environment and in commerce. 

Some toxicity can be traced to deposition in bone and the central nervous system, which is particularly increased in patients with reduced renal function. Because aluminium competes with calcium for absorption, increased amounts of dietary aluminium may contribute to the reduced skeletal mineralization (osteopenia) observed in preterm infants and infants with growth retardation. In very high doses, aluminium can cause neurotoxicity, and is associated with altered function of the barrier.() A small percentage of people are allergic to aluminium and experience dermatitis, digestive disorders, vomiting or other symptoms upon contact or ingestion of products containing aluminium, such as deodorants or antacids. In those without allergies, aluminium is not as toxic as metals, but there is evidence of some toxicity if it is consumed in excessive amounts.() Although the use of aluminium cookware has not been shown to lead to aluminium toxicity in general, excessive consumption of antacids containing aluminium compounds and excessive use of aluminium-containing antiperspirants provide more significant exposure levels. Studies have shown that consumption of acidic foods or liquids with aluminium significantly increases aluminium absorption,() and maltol has been shown to increase the accumulation of aluminium in nervous and osseus tissue.() Furthermore, aluminium increases estrogen-related expression in human cancer cells cultured in the laboratory.() The estrogen-like effects of these salts have led to their classification as a metalloestrogen.

The effects of aluminium in antiperspirants has been examined over the course of decades with little evidence of skin irritation.( Nonetheless, its occurrence in antiperspirants, dyes (such as aluminium lake), and food additives is controversial in some quarters. Although there is little evidence that normal exposure to aluminium presents a risk to healthy adults,(Gitelman, H. J. Physiology of Aluminum in Man, in Aluminum and Health, CRC Press, 1988, ISBN 0824780264, p. 90) some studies point to risks associated with increased exposure to the metal.() Aluminium in food may be absorbed more than aluminium from water.() Some researchers have expressed concerns that the aluminium in antiperspirants may increase the risk of breast cancer,() and aluminium has controversially been implicated as a factor in disease.() The water pollution incident involved a number of people consuming sulfate. Investigations of the long-term health effects are still ongoing, but elevated brain aluminium concentrations have been found in post-mortem examinations of victims, and further research to determine if there is a link with amyloid angiopathy has been commissioned.()

According to Alzheimers Society, the overwhelming medical and scientific opinion is that studies have not convincingly demonstrated a causal relationship between aluminium and Alzheimers disease.(Aluminium and Alzheimers disease, The Alzheimers Society. Retrieved 30 January 2009.) Nevertheless, some studies, such as those on the cohort,() cite aluminium exposure as a risk factor for disease. Some brain plaques have been found to contain increased levels of the metal.() Research in this area has been inconclusive; aluminium accumulation may be a consequence of the disease rather than a causal agent. In any event, if there is any toxicity of aluminium, it must be via a very specific mechanism, since total human exposure to the element in the form of naturally occurring clay in soil and dust is enormously large over a lifetime.()() Scientific consensus does not yet exist about whether aluminium exposure could directly increase the risk of Alzheimers disease.(

 Effect on plants 

Aluminium is primary among the factors that reduce plant growth on acid soils. Although it is generally harmless to plant growth in pH-neutral soils, the concentration in acid soils of toxic Al3+ cations increases and disturbs root growth and function.()()()()

Most acid soils are saturated with aluminium rather than ions. The acidity of the soil is therefore a result of hydrolysis of aluminium compounds.() This concept of corrected lime potential() to define the degree of base saturation in soils became the basis for procedures now used in testing laboratories to determine the lime requirement() of soils.(Applying lime to soils reduces the Aluminum toxicity to plants.
 
)

Wheats adaptation to allow aluminium tolerance is such that the aluminium induces a release of compounds that bind to the harmful aluminium cations. Sorghum is believed to have the same tolerance mechanism. The first gene for aluminium tolerance has been identified in wheat. It was shown that sorghums aluminium tolerance is controlled by a single gene, as for wheat.() This is not the case in all plants.

 See also 

* The Thirteenth Element
* alloy
* Aluminum Association
* battery
* foil
* can
* edge staining
* for the History of Aluminium (IHA)
* of countries by aluminium production
* industry in Russia


* hydroxide

 References 


 External links 
* WebElements.com  Aluminium
* Electrolytic production
* World production of primary aluminium, by country
* Price history of aluminum, according to the IMF
* History of Aluminium (from the website of the International Aluminium Institute)
* Emedicine  Aluminium
















af:Aluminium
am:
ar:
an:Aluminio
ast:Aluminiu
az:Alminium
bn:
zh-min-nan:A-l-mih
be:
be-x-old:
bs:Aluminij
br:Aluminiom
bg:
ca:Alumini
cv:
cs:Hlink
co:Alluminiu
cy:Alwminiwm
da:Aluminium
de:Aluminium
szl
et:Alumiinium
el:
myv:
es:Aluminio
eo:Aluminio
eu:Aluminio
fa:
hif:Aluminium
fr:Aluminium
fy:Aluminium
fur:Alumini
ga:Almanam
gv:Ollymin
gd:Almain
gl:Aluminio
()
xal:
ko:
haw:Aluminuma
hy:
hi:
hr:Aluminij
io:Aluminio
id:Aluminium
ia:Aluminium
os:
is:l
it:Alluminio
he:
jv:Alumunium
kn:
pam:Aluminiu
ka:
kk:
rw:Aluminiyumu
sw:Alumini
kv:
ht:Aliminym
ku:Bafn
mrj:
la:Aluminium
lv:Alumnijs
lb:Aluminium
lt:Aliuminis
lij:Alluminio
jbo:jinmrmalume
lmo:Almnio
hu:Alumnium
mk:
mg:Viraty
ml:
mr:
ms:Aluminium

my:
nl:Aluminium
ne:
new:
ja:
frr:Aluminium
no:Aluminium
nn:Aluminium
nov:Aluminie
oc:Alumini
uz:Aluminiy
pnb:
ps:
nds:Aluminium
pl:Glin
pt:Alumnio
ksh:Allu
ro:Aluminiu
qillay
ru:
sah:
stq:Aluminium
sq:Alumini
scn:Alluminiu
simple:Aluminium
sk:Hlink
sl:Aluminij
sr:
sh:Aluminijum
fi:Alumiini
sv:Aluminium
tl:Aluminyo
ta:
te:
th:
tg:
tr:Alminyum
uk:
ur:Aluminium
ug:
vi:Nhm
fiu-vro:Alumiinium
war:Aluminyo
yi:
yo:Alumnm
zh-yue:
bat-smg:Aliomnis
zh:</eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>1081</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>Economy_of_Azerbaijan</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>spelling 

Azerbaijan is an economy that has completed its post-Soviet transition into a major oil based economy (with the completion of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline), from one where the state played the major role. Azeri GDP grew 41.7% in the first quarter of 2007, possibly the highest of any nation worldwide.()
Such rates cannot be sustained, but despite reaching 26.4% in 2005 (second highest GDP growth in the world in 2005 only to Guinea), and 2006 over 34.6% (world highest), in 2008 dropped to 10.8%, and dropped further to 9.3% in 2009 (Today.az GDP growth makes 3.4% in Azerbaijan in 2009).  The real GDP growth rate for 2011 is expected at 3.7%(Indexmundi Azerbaijan GDP - real growth rate).

Large oil reserves are a major contributor to the economy. The national currency, the manat, was stable in 2000, depreciating 3.8% against the dollar. The budget deficit equaled 1.3% of GDP in 2000.

Progress on economic reform has generally lagged behind macroeconomic stabilization. The government has undertaken regulatory reforms in some areas, including substantial opening of trade policy, but inefficient public administration in which commercial and regulatory interests are co-mingled limit the impact of these reforms. The government has largely completed privatization of agricultural lands and small and medium-sized enterprises. In August 2000, the government launched a second-stage privatization program, in which many large state enterprises will be privatized. Since 2001, the economic activity in the country is regulated by the Ministry of Economic Development of Azerbaijan Republic.

Macro-economic trend
The following is a chart of trend of gross domestic product of Azerbaijan at market prices(estimated by the International Monetary Fund) with figures in millions of Manats.


For purchasing power parity comparisons, the US dollar was exchanged at 1,565.88 Manats only. Currently, the new Manat is in use, with an exchange rate of about 1 manat  $1.10. Mean graduate pay was $5.76 per manhour in 2010.

For more than a century the backbone of the Azerbaijani economy has been petroleum, which represented 10 percent of Azerbaijans GDP in 2005, and is projected to double to almost 20 percent of GDP in 2007.(Azerbaijan: Energy profile (Enerpub, 13 December 2007)) Now that Western oil companies are able to tap deepwater oilfields untouched by the Soviets because of poor technology, Azerbaijan is considered one of the most important areas in the world for oil exploration and development. Proven reserves in the Caspian Basin, which Azerbaijan shares with Russia, Kazakhstan, Iran, and Turkmenistan, are comparable in size to the North Sea, although exploration is still in the early stages.

External trade
thumb|right|200px|Azerbaijani exports in 2006
Azerbaijan has concluded 21 production-sharing agreements with various oil companies. An export pipeline that transports Caspian oil to the Mediterranean from Baku through Tbilisi, Georgia to Ceyhan, Turkey (the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan Pipeline) became operational in 2006. The pipeline is expected to generate as much as $160 billion in revenues for the country over the next 30 years. The recent high price of oil is highly beneficial to Azerbaijans economy as the nation is in the midst of an oil boom. Eastern Caspian producers in cara was here Kazakhstan also have expressed interest in accessing this pipeline to transport a portion of their production. In March 2001, Azerbaijan concluded a gas agreement with Turkey, providing a future export market for Azerbaijan.

In 2002 the Azerbaijani marine had 54 ships.()

Overview
right|200px|thumb|Downtown Baku.
right|200px|thumb|The National Bank.
Through the Soviet period, Azerbaijan had always been more developed industrially than Armenia and Georgia, two neighboring Transcaucasia countries - but also less diversified, as a result of slow investment in non-oil sector. With a history of industrial development of more than 100 years, Azerbaijan proved to be a leading nation in Southern Caucasus throughout the turmoil of Soviet Union collapse in early 1990s until nowadays.

Oil remains the most prominent product of Azerbaijans economy with cotton, natural gas and agriculture products contributing to its economic growth over the last five years. More than $60 billion was invested into Azerbaijans oil by major international oil companies in AIOC consortium operated by BP. Oil production under the first of these PSAs, with the Azerbaijan International Operating Company, began in November 1997 and now is about 500,000 b/d. People visit petroleum spas (or oil spas) to bathe in the local crude in Naftalan(Azerbaijani answer to oil glut: Bathe in it - Asia - Pacific - International Herald Tribune) A leading caviar producer and exporter in the past, Azerbaijans industry today is concentrated on the dwindling stocks of sturgeon and beluga in the Sea.

Azerbaijan shares all the problems of the former Soviet republics in making the transition from a command to a economy, but its energy resources brighten its long-term prospects. Azerbaijan has begun making progress on economic reform, and old economic ties and structures are slowly being replaced. An obstacle to economic progress, including stepped up foreign investment, is the continuing conflict with Armenia over the Nagorno-Karabakh region. Trade with Russia and the other former Soviet republics is declining in importance while trade is building up with Turkey, Iran, UAE, and the countries of EU. Azerbaijan is also a member of the Cooperation Organization (ECO). Long-term prospects will depend on world oil prices and the location of new pipelines in the region.
In 2010, Azerbaijan entered into top eight biggest oil suppliers to EU countries with  9.46 billion.(http://today.az/news/business/82397.html)

Environmental issues
Azerbaijan faces serious environmental challenges. Soil throughout the region was contaminated by DDT and toxic defoliants used in cotton production during the Soviet era. Caspian petroleum and petrochemicals industries also have contributed to present air and water pollution problems. Several environmental organizations exist in Azerbaijan, yet few funds have been allocated to begin the necessary cleanup and prevention programs. Over-fishing by poachers is threatening the survival of Caspian sturgeon stocks, the source of most of the worlds supply of caviar. The on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) has listed as threatened all sturgeon species, including all commercial Caspian varieties. In 2007 the Blacksmith Institute listed Sumgayit as one of the ten most polluted cities in the world.(Walsh, Bryan (2007) The Worlds Most Polluted Places Time Magazine, accessed 21 June 2010)(Staff (14 September 2007) Ten most polluted places named BBC News)  According to Mercer Human Resource Consulting 2007 Worldwide Quality of Living Survey, the capital of Azerbaijan, Baku, was the worlds lowest-ranking city for health and sanitation;(Go Figure: Mercer issues 2007 Worldwide Quality of Living Survey Mercer Human Resource Consulting) however, by 2010 Baku had pulled itself up 4 index points and its place was taken by Port-au-Prince in Haiti.(Pesquisa Mercer 2010: classificao mundial de Qualidade de Vida nas cidades Mercer Human Resource Consulting, in Portuguese, accessed 21 June 2010)

Diversification
Image:Baku pipelines.svg|thumb|right|200px|The pipeline (green) is one of several pipelines running from Baku.
In 2007, mining and hydrocarbon industries accounted for well over 95 per cent of the Azerbaijani economy. Diversification of the economy into manufacturing industries remain a long-term issue.

Business environment
In 2008, Azerbaijan was cited as the top reformer by the Banks Business report:()


Other statistics
:Data from CIA World Factbook(Azerbaijan economy) unless noted otherwise

;Investment (gross fixed)
21% of GDP (2008 est.)

;Household income or consumption by percentage share
* lowest 10%: 3.1%
* highest 10%: 29.5% (2001)

;Inflation rate (consumer prices)
21.6% (2008 est.)

;Agriculture
* utilized agricultural land:  (2007)()
* total wood resources: 136 million cubic metres
* crops: cotton, grain, rice, grapes, fruit, vegetables, tea, tobacco
* livestock products: beef, mutton, poultry, milk, eggs

;Industrial production growth rate
12% (2008 est.)

;Electricity
* production: 23,80 billion kWh (2007)
* consumption: 27,50 billion kWh (2007)
* exports: 800 million kWh (2007)
* imports: 500 million kWh (2007)

;Current account balance
* $19,36 billion (2008 est.)

;Exports - commodities
* petroleum and natural gas, products, oilfield equipment; steel, ore, cement; chemicals, petrochemicals, textiles, machinery, cotton, foodstuffs.

;Reserves of foreign exchange and gold
* $30 billion (2010 est.)

;Debt - external
* $2.73 billion (2008 est.)

;Economic aid - recipient
* ODA, $223.4 million (2005 est.)

;Currency
* 1 Manat  100 gepik

;Exchange rates
* Azerbaijani manat per US dollar - 0.7893 (as of 2011(http://abc.az/eng/news_10_02_2011_51496.html Azerbaijan Business Center website, accessed 10 Feb, 2011)
* Azerbaijani manat per Euro - 1.24 (as of 2008)

;Fiscal year
* Calendar year

See also
* of companies of Azerbaijan
* manat
* of Azerbaijani companies
* pipeline
* Oil Company of Azerbaijan
* industry in Azerbaijan
* in Azerbaijan
* in Azerbaijan
* Azerbaijan
* Baku
* of Azerbaijan

References


External links
* Azerbaijan Economy
*
* http://www.defensenews.com/story.php?F940090&Casiapac
* Energy Potential Of Azerbaijan: Can It Be Used As Alternative For Russia?









de Azerbaiyn
 
de lAzerbadjan
di Azerbaijan
do Azerbaijo

e Azerbajxhanit

t Azerbaijan
zh:</eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>1087</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>Foreign_relations_of_Azerbaijan</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>
Azerbaijan is a member of the Nations, the for Security and Cooperation in Europe, NATOs for Peace, Euro-Atlantic Partnership; Health Organization, the Bank for Reconstruction and Development; the of Europe, CFE Treaty, the of Democracies; the Monetary Fund; and the Bank.

Azerbaijan has formal involvement with senior ex-US government officials including Baker and Kissinger as they serve on the Honorary Council of Advisors(USACC. Honorary Council of Advisors) of the USAzerbaijan Chamber of Commerce (USACC). USACC is co-chaired by Tim Cejka, President of Mobil Corporation and Reza Vaziri, President of Investment Group and Chairman of the Asian Mining Plc (LSE Ticker: AAZ).()

International organization participation
AsDB, BSEC, CE, CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, GUAM, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, ITUC, OAS (observer), OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)

Countries

Azerbaijan currently has diplomatic relations with 160 countries:()() Afghanistan, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, the Republic of China, Denmark, Egypt, France, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Greece, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Kuwait, Libya, Luxembourg, Mexico, Moldova, Mongolia, Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Poland, Qatar, of India, Romania, Russia, Arabia, Serbia, Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tajikistan, Togo, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Arab Emirates, Kingdom, States, Uzbekistan and Vietnam.(National Holiday of Uzbekistan marked in Baku, AzerTAj)

Azerbaijan is one of the few countries with predominantly Muslim populations that shares a strategic alliance with Israel. Today, Israel is a major arms supplier to the country. (See relations).

Azerbaijan also maintains good relations with the Union, in the framework of its Eastern Neighbourhood Policy (See and the European Union).

Information on some of the countries with which Azerbaijan maintains formal relations
Europe



Asia


Africa


North and South America


Oceania


No relations
right|350px|Diplomatic relations of Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan maintains diplomatic relations with 166 states (including Palestine and the City) and the Union. Azerbaijan has not yet established diplomatic with:(Azerbaijan MFA - diplomatic relations)
* Bahamas, Dominica, Barbados, and Tobago
* Monaco, Cyprus, Armenia
* Togo, Nigeria, African Republic, Congo, Congo, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Namibia, Lesotho, Tome and Principe
* Bhutan
* Palau, Micronesia, Federated States of, Kiribati, Niue, Islands, Vanuatu, Islands, Tonga, Samoa, New Guinea
* Military Order of Malta
* the rest of states with limited recognition

Disputes

50th Anniversary UN High Commissioner for Refugees..jpg|right|350px|thumb|50th Anniversary UN High Commissioner for Refugees. The refugees under the Armenia aggression. and the tent small town are pictured on the souvenir sheet..

Nagorno-Karabakh/Armenia

Armenia supports ethnic Armenians in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan in the longstanding and very bitter separatist conflict against the Azerbaijani Government;

Nagorno-Karabakh is a region within Azerbaijan. The current conflict over Nagorno-Karabakh (NK) began in 1988 when Armenian demonstrations against Azerbaijani rule broke out in both Nagorno-Karabakh and Armenia and the Nagorno-Karabakh Soviet voted to secede from Azerbaijan and join Armenia. Soon, violence broke out against ethnic Azeris in Armenia and ethnic Armenians in Azerbaijan. In 1990, after violent episodes in Armenia, Nagorno-Karabakh, Baku and Sumgait, Moscow declared a state of emergency in Karabakh, sent troops to the region, and forcibly occupied Baku, killing over a hundred civilians. In April 1991, Azerbaijani militia and Soviet forces targeted Armenian paramilitaries operating in Karabakh. Moscow also deployed troops to Yerevan. Following the collapse of the Union, conflict escalated into a full-scale war between Armenia and Azerbaijan. Military action was heavily influenced by the Russian military, which inspired and manipulated the rivalry between the two neighbouring nations in order to keep both under control.

More than 30,000 people were killed in the fighting from 1992 to 1994. In May 1992, Armenian forces seized Shusha and Lachin (thereby linking Nagorno-Karabakh to Armenia). By October 1993, Armenian forces succeeded in occupying almost all of former NKAO, Lachin and large areas in southwestern Azerbaijan. In 1993, the Security Council adopted four resolutions calling for the cessation of hostilities, unimpeded access for international humanitarian relief efforts, and the eventual deployment of a peacekeeping force in the region. Fighting continued, however, until May 1994 when Russia brokered a cease-fire.

Negotiations to resolve the conflict peacefully have been ongoing since 1992 under the aegis of the Minsk Group of the OSCE. The Minsk Group is currently co-chaired by Russia, France, and the States and has representation from Turkey, the U.S., several European nations, Armenia, and Azerbaijan. Despite the 1994 cease-fire, sporadic violations, sniper-fire, and landmine incidents continue to claim over 100 lives each year.

Since 1997, the Minsk Group Co-Chairs have presented three proposals to serve as a framework for resolving the conflict. One side or the other rejected each of those proposals. Beginning in 1999, the Presidents of Azerbaijan and Armenia initiated a direct dialogue through a series of face-to-face meetings, often facilitated by the Minsk Group Co-Chairs. Most recently the OSCE sponsored a round of negotiations between the Presidents in West, Florida. U.S. Secretary of State Powell launched the talks on April 3, 2001, and the negotiations continued with mediation by the U.S., Russia, and France until April 6, 2001. The Co-Chairs are continuing to work with the two Presidents in the hope of finding a lasting peace.

The two countries are still technically at war.

Caspian Sea
Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet determined with Iran and Turkmenistan. Issues with Russia and Kazakhstan were settled in 2003.

See also
*and the European Union
*of diplomatic missions in Azerbaijan
*of diplomatic missions of Azerbaijan
*requirements for Azerbaijani citizens

References
*World Factbook 2000 and the 2003 U.S. Department of State website


 External links 
* U.S. Embassy in Azerbaijan in Baku
* Embassy of the Republic of Azerbaijan in Washington
* Tajikistan & Kyrgyzstan relations








Aserbaidschans

 </eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
