<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>657</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>Asphalt</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>

File:Bitumen.jpg|thumb|Natural bitumen from the sea

Image:University of Queensland Pitch drop experiment-6-2.jpg|thumb|100px|The University of Queensland drop experiment, demonstrating the viscosity of bitumen.

Asphalt  also known as bitumen is a sticky, black and highly viscous liquid or semi-solid that is present in most crude petroleums and in some natural deposits, it is a substance classed as a pitch. Until the 20th century, the term asphaltum was also used.( Full text at Internet Archive (archive.org))

The primary use of asphalt is in road construction, where it is used as the glue or binder mixed with aggregate particles to create concrete. Its other main uses are for waterproofing products, including production of felt and for sealing flat roofs.

The terms asphalt and bitumen are often used interchangeably to mean both natural and manufactured forms of the substance. In English, asphalt (or asphalt cement) is the carefully refined residue from the distillation process of selected crude oils. Outside the U.S., the product is often called bitumen. Natural deposits terminology also sometimes uses the word bitumen, such as at the Brea Tar Pits.

Naturally occurring asphalt is sometimes specified by the term crude Bitumen; its viscosity is similar to that of cold molasses.(
)() whilst the material obtained from the distillation of oil (boiling at ) is sometimes referred to as refined bitumen.

Etymology
The word asphalt is derived from the late Middle English, in turn from French asphalte, based on Latin asphalton, asphaltum, which is the latinisation of the Greek  (sphaltos, sphalton), a word meaning asphalt/bitumen/pitch which some derive from - without and , (sfall), to make fall.() Note that in French, the term asphalte is used for naturally occurring bitumen-soaked limestone deposits, and for specialised manufactured products with fewer voids or greater bitumen content than the asphaltic concrete used to pave roads.
Another description has it that the term derives from the Accadian term asphaltu or sphallo, meaning to split. It was later adopted from the Homeric Greeks as a verb meaning to make firm or stable, to secure. It is a significant fact that the first use of asphalt by the ancients was in the nature of a cement for securing or joining together various objects, and it thus seems likely that the name itself was expressive of this application. From the Greek, the word passed into late Latin, and thence into French (asphalte) and English (asphaltum and asphalt).

The expression bitumen originated in the Sanskrit, where we find the words jatu, meaning pitch, and jatu-krit, meaning pitch creating, pitch producing (referring to coniferous or resinous trees). The Latin equivalent is claimed by some to be originally gwitu-men (pertaining to pitch), and by others, pixtumens (exuding or bubbling pitch), which was subsequently shortened to bitumen, thence passing via French into English. From the same root is derived the Anglo Saxon word cwidu (Mastix), the German word Kitt (cement or mastic) and the old Norse word kvada.(Abraham, Herbert (1938), p.1)

Neither of the terms Asphalt or Bitumen should be confused with tar or tars.

 Modern usage 
Bitumina3.jpg|thumb|A tanker with the name Bitumina.
In English, the word asphalt is used to refer to a mixture of mineral aggregate and bitumen (or tarmac in common parlance). The earlier word asphaltum is now archaic and not commonly used. In English, asphalt is equivalent to the British bitumen. However, asphalt is also commonly used as a shortened form of concrete (therefore equivalent to the British asphalt or tarmac). In English, bitumen is sometimes used as the generic term for road surfaces. In English, the word bitumen is used to refer to the vast Canadian deposits of extremely heavy oil,(
) while asphalt is used for the refinery product used to pave roads and manufacture shingles and various waterproofing products. Diluted bitumen (diluted with naphtha to make it flow in pipelines) is known as dilbit in the Canadian petroleum industry, while bitumen upgraded to crude oil is known as syncrude and syncrude blended with bitumen as synbit.(
)

Bitumen is still the preferred geological term for naturally occurring deposits of the solid or semi-solid form of petroleum. Bituminous rock is a form of sandstone impregnated with bitumen. The sands of Canada are a similar material.

Bitumen is sometimes incorrectly called tar (tar is a black viscous material obtained from the destructive distillation of coal and is chemically distinct from bitumen).

Chemistry

The substance is completely soluble in disulfide, and composed primarily of a mixture of highly condensed aromatic hydrocarbons; it is most commonly modelled as a colloid, with asphaltenes as the dispersed phase and maltenes as the continuous phase (though there is some disagreement amongst chemists regarding its structure). One writer states that although a considerable amount of work has been done on the composition of asphalt, it is exceedingly difficult to separate individual hydrocarbon in pure form,() and it is almost impossible to separate and identify all the different molecules of asphalt, because the number of molecules with different chemical structure is extremely large.(Muhammad Abdul Quddus (1992), p.99, in ch.5 pdf)

Most natural bitumens contain sulfur and several heavy metals such as nickel, vanadium, lead, chromium, mercury and also arsenic, selenium, and other toxic elements. Bitumens can provide good preservation of plants and animal fossils.

Background
Asphalt or bitumen can sometimes be confused with tar, which is a similar black thermo-plastic material produced by the distillation of coal. During the early- and mid-20th century when gas was produced, tar was a readily available product and extensively used as the binder for road aggregates. The addition of tar to macadam roads led to the word tarmac, which is now used in common parlance to refer to road making materials. However, since the 1970s, when gas succeeded town gas, asphalt (bitumen) has completely overtaken the use of tar in these applications. Other examples of this confusion include the Brea Tar Pits and the Canadian Sands. Pitch is another term mistakenly used at times to refer to asphalt/bitumen, as in Lake.

Natural deposits of asphalt include lake asphalts (primarily from the Lake in and Tobago and Bermudez in Venezuela), Gilsonite, the Sea, bituminous rock and Sands. Asphalt was mined at Ritchie Mines in Macfarlan in County, West Virginia in the United States from 1852 to 1873. Bituminous rock was mined at many locations in the United States for use as a paving material, primarily during the late 1800s.

Asphalt can be separated from the other components in crude oil (such as naphtha, gasoline and diesel) by the process of distillation, usually under vacuum conditions. A better separation can be achieved by further processing of the heavier fractions of the crude oil in a unit, which uses either propane or butane in a supercritical phase to dissolve the lighter molecules which are then separated. Further processing is possible by blowing the product: namely reacting it with oxygen. This makes the product harder and more viscous.

Asphalt is typically stored and transported at temperatures around 150 degrees Celsius (300 F).  Sometimes oil or kerosene are mixed in before shipping to retain liquidity; upon delivery, these lighter materials are separated out of the mixture. This mixture is often called bitumen feedstock, or BFS. Some trucks route the hot engine exhaust through pipes in the dump body to keep the material warm.  The backs of tippers carrying asphalt, as well as some handling equipment, are also commonly sprayed with a releasing agent before filling to aid release. Diesel oil is sometimes used as a agent, although it can mix with and thereby reduce the quality of the asphalt.

History
Geological origin
Image:Puy de Poix, gisement bitumeux.JPG|thumb|right|Bituminous outcrop of the Puy de la Poix, Clermont-Ferrand, France
Naturally occurring deposits of bitumen are formed from the remains of ancient, microscopic algae and other once-living things.  When these organisms died, their remains were deposited in the mud on the bottom of the ocean or lake where they lived. Under the heat and pressure of burial deep in the earth, the remains were transformed into materials such as bitumen, kerogen, or petroleum. Deposits at the Brea Tar Pits are an example.

There are structural similarities between bitumens and the organic matter in carbonaceous meteorites.(Hayatsu etal., Meteoritics, Vol. 18, p.310) However, detailed studies have shown these materials to be distinct.(Kim & Yang Journal of Astronomy and Space Sciences, vol. 15, no. 1, p. 163-174)

Ancient times
The use of bitumen for waterproofing and as an adhesive dates at least to the third millennium BCE in the early Indus community of Mehrgarh where it was used to line the baskets in which they gathered crops.(McIntosh, Jane. The Ancient Indus Valley. p. 57)

In the ancient East, the Sumerians used natural asphalt deposits for mortar between bricks and stones, to cement parts of carvings, such as eyes, into place, for ship caulking, and for waterproofing.( In some versions of the of Genesis in the Bible, the name of the substance used to bind the bricks of the of Babel is translated as bitumen (see Gen 11:3). A one-kilometre tunnel beneath the river Euphrates at Babylon in the time of Queen Semiramis (ca. 800 B.C.) was reportedly constructed of burnt bricks covered with bitumen as a waterproofing agent.() This must be regarded as legendary but indicative that the concept was known. The Persian word for asphalt is moom, which is related to the English word mummy. Asphalt was also used by Egyptians to embalm mummies.(() The Greek historian Herodotus said hot bitumen was used as mortar in the walls of Babylon.(Herodotus, Book I, 179)

In the ancient East, natural asphalt was slowly boiled to get rid of the higher fractions, leaving a material of higher molecular weight which is thermoplastic and when layered on objects, became quite hard upon cooling. This was used to cover objects that needed waterproofing,( such as scabbards and other items. Statuettes of household deities were also cast with this type of material in Japan, and probably also in China.

In America, archaeological recovery has indicated that asphalt was sometimes used to adhere stone points to a wooden shaft.(C.Michael Hogan (2008) Morro Creek, ed. by A. Burnham)

Approximately 40 A.D. Dioscorides described production of asphaltos (as distinguished from pissasphalt and naphtha): (1655 Goodyer translation). The Judaicum Bitumen is a famous deposit of native asphalt seeping through diapirs at the bottom of the Dead Sea, which comes occasionally to the surface through seismic activity in blocks of up to 100 tons in weight which are more than 99.99% pure.  It was the object of the first known battle for a hydrocarbon deposit, between the Seleucids and the Nabateans in 312 B.C.()
The Judaicum Bitumen is better than others; that is reckoned the best, which doth shine like purple, being of a strong scent & weightie, but the black and fowle is naught for it is adulterated with Pitch mixed with it. It growes in Phoenice also, and in Sidon, & in Babylon, & in Zacynthum. It is found also moyst swimming upon wells in the countrie of the Agrigentines of Sicilie, which they use for lamps instead of oyle, and which they call falsely Sicilian oyle, for it is a kinde of moyst Bitumen.( translated by Goodyer (1655) http://www.therenaissanceman.org/images/DIOSCORIDES-Intro_Book_1.doc or (Greek/Latin) compiled by Sprengel (1829) http://books.google.com/books/download/Pedanii_Dioscoridis_____de_materia_medic.pdf?idJwAUAAAAQAAJ&outputpdf p. 100 (p. 145 in PDF))
The Sidon bitumen is thought to refer to bitumen found at Hasbeya.(The organic geochemistry of the Hasbeya asphalt (Lebanon): comparison with asphalts from the Dead Sea area and Iraq Jacques Connan and Arie Nissenbaumb Organic Geochemistry Volume 35, Issue 6, June 2004, Pages 775-789 doi:10.1016/j.orggeochem.2004.01.015) Pliny refers also to bitumen being found in Epirus.

Early use in Europe
An 1838 edition of Mechanics Magazine cites an early use of asphalt in France. A pamphlet dated 1621, by a certain Monsieur dEyrinys, states that he had discovered the existence (of asphaltum) in large quantities in the vicinity of Neufchatel, and that he proposed to use it in a variety of ways - principally in the construction of air-proof granaries, and in protecting, by means of the arches, the water-courses in the city of Paris from the intrusin of dirt and filth, which at that time made the water unusable. He expatiates also on the excellence of this material for forming level and durable terraces in palaces, the notion of forming such terraces in the streets not one likely to cross the brain of a Parisian of that generation.() But it was generally  neglected in France until the revolution of 1830. Then, in the 1830s, there was a surge of interest, and asphalt became widely used for pavements, flat roofs, and the lining of cisterns, and in England, some use of it had been made of it for similar purposes. Its rise in Europe was a sudden phenomenon, after natural deposits were found in France at Osbann (BasRhin), the Parc (lAin) and the Puy-de-la-Poix (Puy-de-Dome), although it could also be made artificially.(. Note: different sections of Miles online work were written in different years, as evidenced at the top of each page (not including the heading page of each section). This particular section appears to have been written in 2000) One of the earliest uses in France was the laying of about 24,000 square yards of Seyssel asphalt at the de la Concorde in 1835.()

Photography and art
Bitumen was also used in early photographic technology. It was most notably used by French scientist Nicphore Nipce in the first picture ever taken. The bitumen used in his experiments were smeared on pewter plates and then exposed to light, thus making a black and white image.  It was similarly used to print millions of photochrom postcards.

Bitumen was the nemesis of many artists during the 19th century.  Although widely used for a time, it ultimately proved unstable for use in oil painting, especially when mixed with the most common dilutents, such as linseed oil, varnish  and turpentine.  Unless thoroughly diluted, bitumen never fully solidifies and will in time corrupt the other pigments with which it comes into contact.  The use of bitumen as a glaze to set in shadow or mixed with other colors to render a darker tone resulted in the eventual deterioration of a good many paintings, those of Delacroix being just one notable example.

Early use in the United Kingdom
Among the earlier uses of asphalt in the United Kingdom, was for etching. William Salmons Polygraphice (1673) provides a recipe for varnish used in etching, consisting of three ounces of virgin wax, two ounces of mastic, and one ounce of asphaltum.() By the fifth edition in 1685, he had included more asphaltum recipes from other sources.( Text at Internet Archive)

The first British patent for the use of asphalt was Cassells patent asphalte or bitumen in 1834.( Then on 25 November 1837, Richard Tappin Claridge patented the use of Seyssel asphalt (patent #7849), for use in asphalte pavement,()( Writer is replying to note or query from previous publication, cited as 9th S. xi. 30) having seen it employed in France and Belgium when visiting with Walter Simms, who worked with him on the introduction of asphalt to Britain.()()  Dr T. Lamb Phipson claims that his father, Samuel Ryland Phipson, a friend of Claridge, was also instrumental in introducing the asphalte pavement (in 1836).( Full text at Internet Archive (archive.org)) Indeed, mastic pavements had been previously employed at Vauxhall by a competitor of Claridge, but without success.(

In 1838, Claridge obtained patents in Scotland on 27 March, and Ireland on 23 April, and in 1851 extensions were sought for all three patents, by the trustees of a company previously formed by Claridge.(()()() This was Claridges Patent Asphalte Company, formed in 1838 for the purpose of introducing to Britain Asphalte in its natural state from the mine at Pyrimont Seysell in France,( Full text at Internet Archive (archive.org). Alternative viewing at: http://books.google.com/books?idsQ5AAAAAYAAJ&pg) and laid one of the first asphalt pavements in Whitehall.(Miles, Lewis (2000), pp.10.06.1-2) Trials were made of the pavement in 1838 on the footway in Whitehall, the stable at Knightsbridge Barracks,((Comments on asphalt patents of R.T. Claridge, Esq (1904), p.18) and subsequently on the space at the bottom of the steps leading from Waterloo Place to St. James Park.( The formation in 1838 of Claridges Patent Asphalte Company (with a distinguished list of aristocratic patrons, and Marc and Isambard Brunel as, respectively, a trustee and consulting engineer), gave an enormous impetus to the development of a British asphalt industry.( By the end of 1838, at least two other companies, Robinsons and the Bastenne company, were in production,(Miles, Lewis (2000), p.10.06.2) with asphalt being laid as paving at Brighton, Herne Bay, Canterbury, Kensington, the Strand, and a large floor area in Bunhill-row, while meantime Claridges Whitehall paving continue(d) in good order.()

Indeed in 1838, there was a flurry of entrepreneurial activity over asphalt, which had uses beyond paving. For example, asphalt could also used for flooring, damp proofing in buildings, and for waterproofing of various types of pools and baths, with these latter themselves proliferating in the 19th century.((( (Enter asphalt into the search field for list of pages discussing the subject)) On the London stockmarket, there were various claims as to the exclusivity of asphalt quality from France, Germany and England. And numerous patents were granted in France, with similar numbers of patent applications being denied in England due to their similarity to each other. In England, Claridges was the type most used in the 1840s and 50s (

In 1914, Claridges Company entered into a joint venture to produce tar-bound macadam,() with materials manufactured through a subsidiary company called Clarmac Roads Ltd.() Two products resulted, namely Clarmac, and Clarphalte, with the former being manufactured by Clarmac Roads and the latter by Claridges Patent Asphalte Co., although Clarmac was more widely used.() However, the First World War  impacted financially on the Clarmac Company, which entered into liquidation in 1915.(Clarmac financial difficults due to WW1 Debentures deposited The Law Reports: Chancery Division, (1921) Vol. 1 p.545. Retrieved 17 June 2010.)() The failure of Clarmac Roads Ltd had a flow-on effect to Claridges Company, which was itself compulsorily wound up,(Claridges Patent Asphalte Co. compulsorily wound up Funds invested in new company The Law Times Reports (1921) Vol.125, p.256. Retrieved 15 June 2010.) ceasing operations in 1917,()() having invested a substantial amount of funds into the new venture, both at the outset,( and in a subsequent attempt to save the Clarmac Company.(

 Early use in the United States 
The first use of asphaltum in the New World was by indigenous peoples.  On the west coast, as early as the 13th century, the Tongva, Luiseo and Chumash peoples collected the naturally occurring asphaltum that seeped to the surface above underlying petroleum deposits.  All three used the substance as an adhesive.  It is found on many different artifacts of tools and ceremonial items. For example, it was used on rattles to adhere gourds or turtle shells to rattle handles.  It was also used in decorations.  Small round shell beads were often set in asphaltum to provide decorations.  It was used as a sealant on baskets to make them water tight for carrying water.  Asphaltum was used also to seal the planks on ocean-going canoes.

Roads in the US have been paved with asphalt since at least 1870, when a street in front of Newark, NJs City Hall was paved.  In 1876, asphalt was used to pave Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, DC, in time for the celebration of the national centennial.() Asphalt was also used for flooring, paving and waterproofing of baths and swimming pools during the early 20th century, following similar trends in Europe.(

Modern use
 Rolled asphalt concrete 

The largest use of asphalt is for making concrete for road surfaces and accounts for approximately 85% of the asphalt consumed in the States. Asphalt pavement material is commonly composed of 5 percent asphalt cement and 95 percent aggregates (stone, sand, and gravel). Due to its highly viscous nature, asphalt cement must be heated so that it can be mixed with the aggregates at the asphalt mixing plant. There are about 4,000 asphalt mixing plants in the U.S.

Asphalt road surface is the most widely recycled material in the US, both by gross tonnage and by percentage.  According to a report issued by the Highway Administration and the States Environmental Protection Agency, 80% of the asphalt removed each year from road surfaces during widening and resurfacing projects is reused as part of new roads, roadbeds, shoulders and embankments.

Roofing shingles account for most of the remaining asphalt consumption. Other uses include cattle sprays, fence post treatments, and waterproofing for fabrics.

Asphalt is widely used in airports around the world. Due to the sturdiness, it is widely used for runways dedicated to aircraft landing and taking off.

 Mastic asphalt 
asphalt is a type of asphalt which differs from dense graded asphalt (concrete) in that it has a higher bitumen (binder) content, usually around 710% of the whole aggregate mix, as opposed to rolled asphalt, which has only around 5% added bitumen. This thermoplastic substance is widely used in the building industry for waterproofing flat roofs and tanking underground.  Mastic asphalt is heated to a temperature of  and is spread in layers to form an impervious barrier about  thick.

 Asphalt emulsion 
A number of technologies allow asphalt to be mixed at much lower temperatures. These involve mixing the asphalt with petroleum solvents to form cutbacks with reduced melting point or mixtures with water to turn the asphalt into an emulsion. Asphalt emulsions contain up to 70% asphalt and typically less than 1.5% chemical additives. There are two main types of emulsions with different affinity for aggregates, cationic and anionic. Asphalt emulsions are used in a wide variety of applications. Chipseal involves spraying the road surface with asphalt emulsion followed by a layer of crushed rock, gravel or crushed slag. Slurry Seal involves the creation of a mixture of asphalt emulsion and fine crushed aggregate that is spread on the surface of a road. Cold mixed asphalt can also be made from asphalt emulsion to create pavements similar to hot-mixed asphalt, several inches in depth and asphalt emulsions are also blended into recycled hot-mix asphalt to create low cost pavements.

Other uses

Thin bitumen plates are sometimes used by computer enthusiasts for silencing computer cases or noisy computer parts such as the hard drive. Bitumen layers are baked onto the outside of high end dishwashers to provide sound insulation. Bitumen also is used in paint and marker inks by some graffiti supply companies (primarily Molotow) to increase the weather resistance and permanence of the paint and/or ink, and to make the color much darker.

Petroleum production, alternatives and bioasphalt 

Naturally occurring crude bitumen impregnated in sedimentary rock is the prime feed stock for petroleum production from sands, currently under development in Alberta, Canada. Canada has most of the worlds supply of natural bitumen, covering 140,000 square kilometres( (an area larger than England), giving it the second largest proven reserves in the world. The oil sands is the largest bitumen deposit in Canada and the only one accessible to mining, although recent technological breakthroughs have resulted in deeper deposits becoming producible by in-situ methods. Because of price increases since 2003, upgrading bitumen to synthetic oil has become highly profitable. As of 2006 Canadian crude bitumen production averaged about  per day and was projected to rise to  per day by 2020.( The total amount of crude bitumen in Alberta which could be extracted is estimated to be about ,() which at a rate of  would last about 200 years.

Certain activist groups have become increasingly concerned about the global oil and change problem in recent years due to by-products that are released into the atmosphere. Most of the emissions are derived primarily from burning fuels. This has led to the introduction of petroleum alternatives such as bioasphalt that are more environmentally friendly and less toxic.

Bitumen can now be made from non-petroleum based renewable resources such as sugar, molasses and rice, corn and potato starches.  Bitumen can also be made from waste material by distillation of used motor oils, which is sometimes disposed by burning or dumping into land fills.  Non-petroleum based bitumen binders can be made light-colored. Roads made with lighter-colored pitch absorb less heat from solar radiation, and become less hot than darker surfaces, reducing their contribution to the heat island effect.(http://www.epa.gov/heatisland/ EPA)

See also
*Blacktop
*Asphalt solar collector
*Tarmac
*Grooving & Grinding Association
* Bioasphalt
* Asphaltene
* fuel
* coal
* rocks
* sands
* (resin)
* Tar
* Sealcoat

References




Literature
* Barth, Edwin J., Asphalt:  Science and Technology Gordon and Breach (1962).  ISBN 0-677-00040-5.
*
*

Notes


External links




*
*Pavement Interactive - Asphalt
*U.S EPA
*Asphalt Magazine
*CSU Sacramento, The World Famous Asphalt Museum!
*National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health - Asphalt Fumes














ar:
ar:
an:Gudrn
az:Asfalt
az:Bitum
be:
be-x-old:
bs:Bitumen
bg:
bg:
ca:Asfalt
(geologia)
cs:ivice
da:Bitumen
de:Bitumen
et:Bituumen
el:
es:Betn
eo:Bitumo
(hidrokarburo)
fa:
fr:Bitume
gl:Asfalto

hi:
hr:Asfalt
io:Bitumo
io:Asfalto
id:Aspal
is:Malbik
it:Bitume
he:
kk:
ku:Asfalt
lt:Bitumas
hu:Aszfalt
ms:Asfalt
nl:Bitumen
ja:
ja:
nap:Asfardo
no:Bitumen
nn:Asfalt
pl:Bitumy
pl:Asfalt
pt:Betume
ro:Asfalt
ru:
sk:Asfalt
sl:Bitumen
sh:Asfalt
sr:
fi:Bitumi
sv:Bitumen
tl:Aspalto
th:
tr:Asfalt
uk:
uk:
vi:Bitum
zh-yue:
zh:</eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>659</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>American_National_Standards_Institute</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>
remarks             

The American National Standards Institute (ANSI,  ) is a private organization that oversees the development of voluntary consensus standards for products, services, processes, systems, and personnel in the United States. The organization also coordinates U.S. standards with international standards so that American products can be used worldwide.  For example, standards ensure that people who own cameras can find the film they need for that camera anywhere around the globe. 

ANSI accredits standards that are developed by representatives of standards developing organizations, government agencies, consumer groups, companies, and others. These standards ensure that the characteristics and performance of products are consistent, that people use the same definitions and terms, and that products are tested the same way. ANSI also accredits organizations that carry out product or personnel certification in accordance with requirements defined in international standards.(ANSI 2009 Annual Report)

The organizations headquarters are in DC. ANSIs operations office is located in York City. The ANSI annual operating budget is funded by the sale of publications, membership dues and fees, accreditation services, fee-based programs, and international standards programs.

 History 
ANSI was originally formed in 1918, when five engineering societies and three government agencies founded the American Engineering Standards Committee (AESC). In 1928, the AESC became the American Standards Association (ASA). In 1966, the ASA was reorganized and became the United States of America Standards Institute (USASI). The present name was adopted in 1969.

Prior to 1918, these five founding engineering societies:
*Institute of Electrical Engineers (AIEE, now IEEE)
*Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME)
*Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE)
*American Institute of Mining Engineers (AIME, now Institute of Mining, Metallurgical, and Petroleum Engineers)
*American Society for Testing and Materials (now International)
had been members of the United Engineering Society (UES).
At the behest of the AIEE, they invited the U.S. government Departments of War, Navy (combined in 1947 to become the of Defense or DOD) and Commerce(ANSI history- Retrieved 2011-09-27) to join in founding a national standards organization.

According to Paul G. Agnew, the first permanent secretary and head of staff in 1919, AESC started as an ambitious program and little else.  Staff for the first year consisted of one executive, Clifford B. LePage, who was on loan from a founding member, ASME.  An annual budget of $7,500 was provided by the founding bodies.

In 1931, the organization (renamed ASA in 1928) became affiliated with the U.S. National Committee of the Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), which had been formed in 1904 to develop electrical and electronics standards.(http://www.iec.ch/)

Members
ANSIs membership comprises government agencies, organizations, corporations, academic and international bodies, and individuals. In total, the Institute represents the interests of more than 125,000 companies and 3.5 million professionals.(ANSI membership page, www.ansi.org/membership)

Process
Though ANSI itself does not develop standards, the Institute oversees the development and use of standards by accrediting the procedures of standards developing organizations. ANSI accreditation signifies that the procedures used by standards developing organizations meet the Institutes requirements for openness, balance, consensus, and due process.

ANSI also designates specific standards as American National Standards, or ANS, when the Institute determines that the standards were developed in an environment that is equitable, accessible and responsive to the requirements of various stakeholders.( Value of the ANS Designation brochure)

Voluntary consensus standards quicken the market acceptance of products while making clear how to improve the safety of those products for the protection of consumers. There are approximately 9,500 American National Standards that carry the ANSI designation.

The American National Standards process involves:
*consensus by a group that is open to representatives from all interested parties
*broad-based public review and comment on draft standards
*consideration of and response to comments
*incorporation of submitted changes that meet the same consensus requirements into a draft standard
*availability of an appeal by any participant alleging that these principles were not respected during the standards-development process.

International activities
In addition to facilitating the formation of standards in the U.S., ANSI promotes the use of U.S. standards internationally, advocates U.S. policy and technical positions in international and regional standards organizations, and encourages the adoption of international standards as national standards where appropriate.

The Institute is the official U.S. representative to the two major international standards organizations, the Organization for Standardization (ISO), as a founding member(ISO founding member- Retrieved 2011-09-27), and the Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), via the U.S. National Committee (USNC). ANSI participates in almost the entire technical program of both the ISO and the IEC, and administers many key committees and subgroups. In many instances, U.S. standards are taken forward to ISO and IEC, through ANSI or the USNC, where they are adopted in whole or in part as international standards.

Standards panels
The Institute administers five standards panels:
*The ANSI Biofuels Standards Panel (ANSI-BSP)
*The Information Technology Standards Panel
*The ANSI Homeland Security Standards Panel
*The ANSI Nanotechnology Standards Panel
*The Identity Theft Prevention and Identity Management Standards Panel

Each of the panels works to identify, coordinate, and harmonize voluntary standards relevant to these areas. 

In 2009, ANSI and the National Institute for Standards and Technology (NIST) formed the Nuclear Energy Standards Coordination Collaborative (NESCC). NESCC is a joint initiative to identify and respond to the current need for standards in the nuclear industry. 

American national standards
*The ASA (as for American Standards Association) photographic exposure system, originally defined in ASA Z38.2.1 (since 1943) and ASA PH2.5 (since 1954), together with the DIN system (DIN 4512 since 1934), became the basis for the ISO system (since 1974), currently used worldwide (6, 2240, 5800, 12232).
*A standard for the set of values used to represent characters in digital computers.  The ANSI code standard extended the previously created ASCII seven bit code standard (ASA X3.4-1963), with additional codes for European alphabets (see also Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code or EBCDIC).  In Windows, the phrase ANSI refers to the Windows ANSI code pages (even though they are not ANSI standards).(Microsoft Glossary) Most of these are fixed width, though some characters for languages are variable width. Since these characters are based on a draft of the ISO-8859 series, some of Microsofts symbols are visually very similar to the ISO symbols, leading many to falsely assume that they are identical.
*The first computer language standard was American Standard Fortran (informally known as FORTRAN 66), approved in March 1966 and published as ASA X3.9-1966.
*The original standard implementation of the programming language C was standardized as ANSI X3.159-1989, becoming the well-known C.
*The ANSI-NSF International standards used for commercial kitchens, such as restaurants, cafeterias, delis, etc.
*The ANSI/APSP (Association of Pool & Spa Professionals) standards used for pools, spas, hot tubs, barriers, and suction entrapment avoidance.
*The ANSI/HI (Institute) standards used for pumps.
*The ANSI for protection is Z87.1, which gives a specific impact resistance rating to the eyewear. This standard is commonly used for shop glasses, shooting glasses, and many other examples of protective eyewear.
*The ANSI paper sizes (ANSI/ASME Y14.1).

Other initiatives
*In 2008 ANSI, in  partnership(http://www.citationtechnologies.com/alliances/ansi) with Technologies, created the first dynamic, online web library for 14000 standards.(ANSI ISO 14000 Press Release)
*On June 23, 2009 ANSI announced a product and services agreement with Technologies to deliver all ISO Standards on a web-based platform. Through the ANSI-Citation partnership, 17,765 International Standards developed by more than 3,000 ISO technical bodies will be made available on the citation platform, arming subscribers with powerful search tools and collaboration, notification, and change-management functionality.(ANSI Press Release 07.23.09)
*ANSI, in partnership with Technologies, AAMI, ASTM, and DIN, created a single, centralized database for medical device standards on September 9, 2009.(Medical Device Standards Database Press Release 09/09/09)
*In early 2009, ANSI launched a new Certificate Accreditation Program (ANSI-CAP) to provide neutral, third-party attestation that a given certificate program meets the American National Standard ASTM E2659-09.
*In 2009, ANSI began accepting applications for certification bodies seeking accreditation according to requirements defined under the Toy Safety Certification Program (TSCP) as the official third-party accreditor of TSCPs product certification bodies.
*In 2006, ANSI launched www.StandardsPortal.org, an online resource for facilitating more open and efficient trade between international markets in the areas of standards, conformity assessment, and technical regulations. The site currently features content for China, India, and Korea, with additional countries and regions planned for future content.

See also
*ASCII
*Fortran
*C
*ASC X9
*ASC X12
*escape code
*Architecture
*Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
*of Nuclear Materials Management (INMM)
*of Environmental Sciences and Technology (IEST)
*Crane Operator Certification
*standards

References


External links
*American National Standards Institute official Web site
*ANSI eStandardsStore
* ANSI Overview
*ANSI Historical Overview
**Historical Overview Brochure
*ANSI iPackages Portals & WebStore - ISO14000 online portals
*Documents of Interest:
**ANSI Essential Requirements: Due process requirements for American National Standards
**ANSI Critical Issue Paper: Current Attempts to Change Established Definition of Open Standards
*ANSI code list at Piping-Designer.com







  
zh-min-nan:ANSI
bs:ANSI
br:ANSI
National Standards Institute
National Standards Institute
National Standards Institute
et:ANSI
Nacional Estadounidense de Estndares
  
National Standards Institute
ga:ANSI
National Standards Institute
ko:ANSI
National Standards Institute
 
lv:ANSI
National Standards Institute
hu:ANSI
National Standards Institute
National Standards Institute
ja:ANSI
National Standards Institute
National Standards Institute
National Standards Institute
National Standards Institute
  
National Standards Institute
sl:ANSI
   
National Standards Institute
sv:ANSI
th:
tr:ANSI
  
vi:ANSI
zh:</eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
<eecs485_article>
	<eecs485_article_id>666</eecs485_article_id>
	<eecs485_article_title>Alkali_metal</eecs485_article_title>
	<eecs485_article_body>

The alkali metals are a series of elements in the table. In the modern IUPAC nomenclature, the alkali metals are called the Group 1 elements. Previously, they were called the Group IA elements, with A representing the group elements and numeral I representing the first group within the main-group series. The alkali metals include lithium (Li), sodium (Na), potassium (K), rubidium (Rb), caesium (Cs)groupnote and francium (Fr).(.) Hydrogen (H), although nominally also a member of Group 1,( very rarely exhibits behaviour comparable to the alkali metals. This group lies in the s-block of the periodic table, which means that all its elements have their outermost electron in an s-orbital. The s-block also includes earth metals, plus hydrogen and helium. The alkali metals provide one of the best examples of group trends in properties in the periodic table, with well characterized homologous behaviour down the group.

All of the alkali metals discovered, are naturally occurring, although francium is the second-rarest naturally occurring element. These metals possess similar chemical properties: They are all highly reactive metals under standard conditions. Experiments have been conducted to attempt the synthesis of the next member of the group, which is probably ununennium (Uue), but these have all met with failure, but, since ununennium is the first 8 element and only the first element on the periodic table that has not been discovered, it is likely to be found in the near future. Note that ununennium may not be the next alkali metal due to effects.

Characteristics
Chemistry
Like other groups, the members of this family show patterns in its configuration, especially the outermost shells, resulting in trends in chemical behaviour:



The alkali metals are all highly reactive and are never found in elemental forms in nature. Because of this, they are usually stored in oil or kerosene (paraffin oil). They also tarnish easily and have low melting points and densities.()

The alkali metals are mostly silver-colored, except for metallic caesium, which can have a golden tint. These elements are all soft metals of low density. In chemical terms, all of the alkali metals react aggressively with the halogens to form salts. They all react with water to form strongly alkaline hydroxides. The vigor of reaction increases down the group. The alkali metals have the lowest first ionization energies in their periods of the table because of their low nuclear charge and high electropositivity. The second energy of all of the alkali metals is very high, thus they always form M+ cations. 


thumb|Series of alkali metals, stored in mineral oil (Natrium is sodium.)
All of the alkali metals are notable for their vigorous reactions with water, and these reactions become increasingly vigorous when going down their column in the periodic table towards the heaviest alkali metals, such as caesium. Their chemical reactions with water are as follows:

Alkali metal + water  Alkali metal hydroxide + hydrogen gas

For a typical example (M represents an alkali metal):

:2 M (s) + 2 H2O (l)  2 MOH (aq) + H2 (g)

Alkali metals form a very wide range of amalgams.()
They tend to form ionically bonded salts with most electronegative elements on the periodic table, like fluoride and chloride.

Physics
Potassium and rubidium are naturally weakly radioactive as they have naturally occurring radioisotopes ( and ) and franciums only naturally occurring isotope () is also radioactive with a half-life of only 22.0 minutes. Caesium was also thought to have natural radioisotopes before the discovery of francium, which made the group strange compared to the others.

The alkali metals show a number of trends when moving down the group  for instance: decreasing electronegativity, increasing reactivity, and decreasing melting and boiling point. In general, their densities increase, with the notable exception that potassium is less dense than sodium, and the possible exception of francium, whose physical properties have not been measured because it exists only in small quantities due to its high radioactivity.

Below, hydrogen is included for comparison.


()

Hydrogen

The element hydrogen, with its solitary one electron per atom, is usually placed at the top of Group 1 of the periodic table for convenience, but hydrogen is not counted as an alkali metal. Under typical conditions, pure hydrogen exists as a diatomic gas consisting of two atoms per molecule.

The removal of the single electron of hydrogen requires considerably more energy than removal of the outer electron from the atoms of the alkali metals. As in the halogens, only one additional electron is required to fill in the outermost shell of the hydrogen atom, so hydrogen can in some circumstances behave like a halogen, forming the negative hydride ion. compounds of hydrogen with the alkali metals and some metals have been produced in the laboratory, but these are only laboratory curiosities without much practical use. Under extremely high pressures and low temperatures, such as those found at the cores of the planets Jupiter and Saturn, hydrogen does become metallic, and it behaves like an alkali metal. This type of hydrogen is known as hydrogen.

Hydrogen is sometimes considered to be an alkali metal, as it, like the other alkali metals, has one valence electron; however, hydrogen rarely acts like an alkali metal, as can be seen from the data above. In fact, it is sometimes placed over lithium (due to its configuration),() sometimes carbon (due to its electronegativity)( and sometimes fluorine (due to its chemical properties).()

Ammonium ion

The ammonium ion resembles the heavier alkali metals and is considered a close relative of the alkali metals.()

History
Lithium

Petalite (LiAlSi4O10) was discovered in 1800 by the Brazilian chemist Bonifcio de Andrada e Silva in a mine on the island of Sweden.()()() However, it was not until 1817 that August Arfwedson, then working in the laboratory of the chemist Jakob Berzelius, detected the presence of a new element while analyzing petalite ore.()()() This element formed compounds similar to those of sodium and potassium, though its carbonate and hydroxide were less soluble in water and more alkaline.() Berzelius gave the alkaline material the name lithion/lithina, from the Greek word o (transliterated as lithos, meaning stone), to reflect its discovery in a solid mineral, as opposed to potassium, which had been discovered in plant ashes, and sodium, which was known partly for its high abundance in animal blood. He named the metal inside the material as lithium.((()

Sodium

Although sodium (sometimes called soda in English) has long been recognized in compounds, it was not isolated until 1807 by Davy through the electrolysis of soda.()

Potassium

Potassium metal was first isolated in 1807 in England by Sir Davy, who derived it from caustic potash (KOH), by the use of electrolysis of the molten salt with the newly discovered pile. Potassium was the first metal that was isolated by electrolysis.() Later in the same year, Davy reported extraction of the metal sodium from a mineral derivative (soda, NaOH, or lye), not a plant salt, by a similar technique, demonstrating the elements, and thus the salts, to be different.()()()()

Rubidium

Bunsen and Kirchhoff were the first to suggest finding new elements by analysis. Rubidium was discovered in 1861 by Bunsen and Kirchhoff, in Heidelberg, Germany, in the mineral lepidolite through the use of a spectroscope. Because of the bright red lines in its spectrum, they chose a name derived from the Latin word rubidus, dark red.()()

Caesium
In 1860, Bunsen and Kirchhoff discovered caesium in the water from Drkheim, Germany. Due to the bright-blue lines in its spectrum, they chose a name derived from the Latin word caesius, meaning sky-blue.()((Bunsen quotes Gellius Noctes Atticae II, 26 by Figulus: Nostris autem veteribus caesia dicts est quae Graecis, ut Nigidus ait, de colore coeli quasi coelia.)(English Dictionary, 2nd Edition) Caesium was the first element to be discovered spectroscopically, only one year after the invention of the spectroscope by Bunsen and Kirchhoff.()

Francium
Francium (then known as eka-caesium, because it is below caesium in the table) was discovered in 1939 by Perey of the Curie Institute in France when she purified a sample of actinium-227, which had been reported to have a decay energy of 220 keV. However, Perey noticed decay particles with an energy level below 80 keV. Perey thought this decay activity might have been caused by a previously unidentified decay product, one that was separated during purification, but emerged again out of the pure actinium-227. Various tests eliminated the possibility of the unknown element being thorium, radium, lead, bismuth, or thallium. The new product exhibited chemical properties of an alkali metal (such as coprecipitating with caesium salts), which led Perey to believe that it was element 87, caused by the decay of actinium-227.(Adloff, Jean-Pierre; Kaufman, George B. (2005-09-25). Francium (Atomic Number 87), the Last Discovered Natural Element. The Chemical Educator 10 (5). Retrieved on 2007-03-26.) Perey then attempted to determine the proportion of decay to alpha decay in actinium-227. Her first test put the alpha branching at 0.6%, a figure that she later revised to 1%.()

Before Pereys discovery of francium, there were at least three erroneous and incomplete discoveries.()()()()

Eka-francium
The next element below francium is expected to be ununennium (Uue), element 119, although this is not certain. The synthesis of ununennium was attempted in 1985 by bombarding a target of einsteinium-254 with calcium-48 ions at the superHILAC accelerator at Berkeley, California. No atoms were identified, leading to a limiting yield of 300 nb.()()

\,^{254}_{99}\mathrm{Es} + \,^{48}_{20}\mathrm{Ca} \to \,^{302}_{119}\mathrm{Uue} ^{*} \to \ 
 \ no\ atoms

It is highly unlikely that this reaction will be useful, given the extremely difficult task of making sufficient amounts of 254Es to make a large enough target to increase the sensitivity of the experiment to the required level, due to the rarity of the element, and extreme rarity of the isotope. However, given that ununennium is only the first 8 element on the periodic table, it may well be discovered in the near future. Currently, none of the period 8 elements have been discovered yet. It is also possible that, due to drip instabilities, only the lower period 8 elements are physically possible.

Regardless of what the next element below francium actually is, it will still be known as eka-francium, as it is below francium in the table.

Production
Lithium

Since the end of War II, lithium production has greatly increased. The metal is separated from other elements in igneous minerals such as those above. Lithium salts are extracted from the water of springs, brine pools, and brine deposits. The metal is produced electrolytically from a mixture of fused chloride and chloride.()

Sodium
Sodium was first produced commercially in 1855 by thermal reduction of carbonate with carbon at 1100 C, in what is known as the process.(Eggeman, Tim. Sodium and Sodium Alloys. Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published online 2007. )

: Na2CO3 (l) + 2 C (s)  2 Na (g) + 3 CO (g)

A process based on the reduction of sodium hydroxide was developed in 1886.( Sodium is now produced commercially through the electrolysis of liquid chloride, based on a process patented in 1924.(Pauling, Linus, General Chemistry, 1970 ed., Dover Publications)() This is done in a Cell in which the NaCl is mixed with chloride to lower the point below 700 C. As calcium is less electropositive than sodium, no calcium will be formed at the anode. This method is less expensive than the previous process of electrolyzing hydroxide. Very pure sodium can be isolated by the thermal decomposition of azide.(Merck Index, 9th ed., monograph 8325)

Potassium
Pure potassium metal may be isolated by electrolysis of its hydroxide in a process that has changed little since Davy.() Thermal methods also are employed in potassium production, using chloride.

Potassium salts such as carnallite, langbeinite, polyhalite, and sylvite form extensive deposits in ancient lake and seabeds,() making extraction of potassium salts in these environments commercially viable. The principal source of potassium  potash  is mined in Canada, Russia, Belarus, Germany, Israel, States, Jordan, and other places around the world.()()()

Rubidium
Although rubidium is more abundant in Earths crust than caesium the limited applications and the lack of a mineral rich in rubidium limits the production of rubidium compounds to 2 to 4 tonnes per year.() There are several methods to separate potassium, rubidium and caesium. The crystallization of a rubidium and caesium alum (Cs,Rb)Al(SO4)212H2O yields after 30 subsequent steps pure rubidium alum. Reports of two other methods are given in the literature the chlorostannate process and the ferrocyanide process.(()
For several years in the 1950s and 1960s, a by-product of the potassium production called Alkarb was a main source for rubidium. Alkarb contained 21% rubidium while the rest was potassium and a small fraction of caesium.() Today the largest producers of caesium, for example the  Mine, Manitoba, Canada, produce rubidium as by-product from pollucite.(

Caesium

The mining of pollucite ore is a selective process and is conducted on a small scale in comparison with most metal mining operations. The ore is crushed, hand-sorted, but not usually concentrated, and then ground. Caesium is then extracted from pollucite mainly by three methods: acid digestion, alkaline decomposition, and direct reduction.(()

Francium
File:Pichblende.jpg|thumb|This sample of uraninite contains about 100,000 atoms (3.3 g) of francium-223 at any given time.(|altA shiny gray 5-centimeter piece of matter with a rough surface.
Francium-223 is the result of the alpha decay of actinium-227 and can be found in trace amounts in uranium and thorium minerals.( In a given sample of uranium, there is estimated to be only one francium atom for every 11018 uranium atoms.( It is also calculated that there is at most 30 g of francium in the earths crust at any time.() This makes it the second rarest element in the crust after astatine.((

Francium can also be synthesized in the nuclear reaction:

:197Au + 18O  210Fr + 5 n

This process, developed by Stony Brook Physics, yields francium isotopes with masses of 209, 210, and 211,() which are then isolated by the magneto-optical trap (MOT).()

Eka-francium
Ununennium has not been produced yet as of .((

Occurrence
Lithium
Although lithium is widely distributed on Earth, it does not naturally occur in elemental form due to its high reactivity.( The total lithium content of seawater is very large and is estimated as 230 billion tonnes, where the element exists at a relatively constant concentration of 0.14 to 0.25 parts per million (ppm),()() or 25 micromolar;()
higher concentrations approaching 7 ppm are found near vents.(

Sodium
Owing to its high reactivity, sodium is found in nature only as a compound and never as the free element. Sodium makes up about 2.6% by weight of the Earths crust, making it the sixth most abundant element overall() and the most abundant alkali metal. Sodium is found in many different minerals, of which the most common is ordinary salt (sodium chloride), which occurs in vast quantities dissolved in seawater, as well as in solid deposits (halite). Others include amphibole, cryolite, niter, and zeolite.

Potassium
Potassium does not occur as the free element in nature due to its reactivity but, in compounds, makes up 1.5% of the weight of crust and is the seventh-most-abundant chemical element.

Rubidium
Rubidium is roughly as abundant as zinc and rather more common than copper. It occurs naturally in the minerals leucite, pollucite, carnallite, zinnwaldite, and lepidolite.

Caesium
Caesium is more abundant than antimony, cadmium, tin, and tungsten, and much more abundant than mercury or silver, but 30 times less abundant than rubidium  with which it is so closely chemically associated.()

Francium
Francium-223, the only naturally occurring isotope of francium,() is the result of the alpha decay of actinium-227 and can be found in trace amounts in uranium and thorium minerals() In a given sample of uranium, there is estimated to be only one francium atom for every 11018 uranium atoms.()() It is also calculated that there is at most 30 g of francium in the earths crust at any time.( This makes it the second-rarest element in the crust after astatine.(()

Eka-francium
Ununennium has not been discovered as of .((

Applications
All of the alkali metals have very many applications, some of which are mentioned in the links below:
*Lithium applications
*Sodium applications
*Potassium applications
*Rubidium uses and applications
*Caesium applications
*Francium applications

Biological occurrences

*Lithium has several biological effects. carbonate is used to treat disorder (manic-depression) disorders as it works as a mood stabiliser, although there are side-effects, e.g. excessive ingestion of lithium poisons the nervous system, which is even more dangerous, as the lethal dose is only just above the therapeutic dose. Lithium is present in the human body at about 30 ppb.(accessdate15 February 2011)
*Sodium is an essential element for survival as its cation, Na+, is important for nerve function. Sodium is present in the human body at about 0.14%.(accessdate15 February 2011)
*Potassium is also an essential element for survival as its cation, K+, is essential for nerve and heart function. Potassium is present in the human body at about 0.2%.(accessdate15 February 2011)
*Rubidium has no biological role but may help stimulate metabolism, and can accumulate ahead of potassium in muscle. Rubidium is present in the body at about 4.6 ppm.(accessdate15 February 2011)
*Caesium has no biological role, but can replace potassium to some extent in the body due to having similar chemical properties. Thus, caesium compounds should be avoided when possible, especially those containing radioisotopes of caesium, such as 134Cs and 137Cs. Rats fed caesium instead of potassium die. Caesium chloride (non-radioactive) has also promoted as an alternative cancer therapy,() but has been linked to the deaths of over 50 patients, when it was used as part of a scientifically unvalidated cancer treatment.(Wood, Leonie. ) Caesium is present in the body at about 20 ppb.(accessdate15 February 2011)
*Francium has no biological role(accessdate15 February 2011) and would most likely be extremely toxic due to its extreme radioactivity. If francium was not radioactive, based on trends it would most likely behave like caesium and would, it is presumed, be similarly toxic.

Precautions

The alkali metals all react with water ever more violently and thus should all be handled with great care. Of note is the toxicity of caesium because it replaces potassium. Also, franciums extreme radioactivity is a great hazard, although the greatest quantity of francium ever assembled to date is a sphere of radius 1 mm (over 300,000 neutral atoms).()

See also
*Hydrogen (not an alkali metal)
*Lithium
*Potassium
*Rubidium
*Caesium
*Francium
*Ununennium (possibly an alkali metal)
*periodic table (discusses what may happen to periodic table groups at high number)
*(periodic table)

Notes


References


Bibliography
#
#
#
#
#
#
#

External links
#
#Science aid: Alkali metals A simple look at alkali metals
#Atomic and Physical Properties of the Group 1 Elements An in-depth look at alkali metals

Explanation of above periodic table slice


Links to related articles














alcaln
ast:Alcaln



metali
1   
alcal

kovy
alcalaidd
da:Alkalimetal
de:Alkalimetalle
et:Leelismetallid
el:
es:Alcalino
metalo
alkalino

dhaatu
alcalin
gl:Alcalino


metali
alkali
is:Alkalmlmur
alcalini

alkali


alikali
alkalen
alcalica
metli
lb:Alkalimetall
metalai
alcalitt
hu:Alklifmek

ml:

alkali
nl:Alkalimetaal
ja:1
no:Alkalimetall
nn:Alkalimetall
nds:Alkalimetall
pl:Litowce
alcalino
ksh:Alkalimetall
alcalin
qillay


alkaline
metal
kov
kovina

metali
alkali
fi:Alkalimetalli
sv:Alkalimetall



th:
metal

loi kim

zh-yue:
zh:</eecs485_article_body>

</eecs485_article>
