1164
Artificial_intelligence
File:TOPIO 3.0.jpg|350px|thumb|TOPIO, a robot, played tennis at Tokyo Robot Exhibition (IREX) 2009.(Artificial intelligence (AI) is the intelligence of machines and the branch of science that aims to create it. AI textbooks define the field as the study and design of intelligent agents( where an agent is a system that perceives its environment and takes actions that maximize its chances of success.( John McCarthy, who coined the term in 1956,( defines it as the science and engineering of making intelligent machines.(The field was founded on the claim that a central property of humans, intelligencethe sapience of sapienscan be so precisely described that it can be simulated by a machine.(See the Dartmouth proposal, under Philosophy, below.) This raises philosophical issues about the nature of the mind and the ethics of creating artificial beings, issues which have been addressed by myth, fiction and philosophy since antiquity.( Artificial intelligence has been the subject of optimism,(The optimism referred to includes the predictions of early AI researchers (see optimism in the history of AI) as well as the ideas of modern transhumanists such as Kurzweil.) but has also suffered setbacks(The setbacks referred to include the ALPAC report of 1966, the abandonment of perceptrons in 1970, the Lighthill Report of 1973 and the collapse of the lisp machine market in 1987.) and, today, has become an essential part of the technology industry, providing the heavy lifting for many of the most difficult problems in computer science.(AI research is highly technical and specialized, and deeply divided into subfields that often fail to communicate with each other.( Subfields have grown up around particular institutions, the work of individual researchers, the solution of specific problems, longstanding differences of opinion about how AI should be done and the application of widely differing tools. The central problems of AI include such traits as reasoning, knowledge, planning, learning, communication, perception and the ability to move and manipulate objects.( General intelligence (or AI) is still among the fields long term goals.( HistoryThinking machines and artificial beings appear in myths, such as Talos of Crete, the bronze robot of Hephaestus, and Pygmalions Galatea.( Human likenesses believed to have intelligence were built in every major civilization: animated images were worshipped in Egypt and Greece( and humanoid automatons were built by Yan Shi, of Alexandria and Al-Jazari.( It was also widely believed that artificial beings had been created by ibn Hayyn, Loew and Paracelsus.( By the 19th and 20th centuries, artificial beings had become a common feature in fiction, as in Shelleys Frankenstein or apeks (Rossums Universal Robots).( McCorduck argues that all of these are examples of an ancient urge, as she describes it, to forge the gods.( Stories of these creatures and their fates discuss many of the same hopes, fears and ethical concerns that are presented by artificial intelligence.Mechanical or formal reasoning has been developed by philosophers and mathematicians since antiquity. The study of logic led directly to the invention of the programmable digital electronic computer, based on the work of mathematician Turing and others. Turings of computation suggested that a machine, by shuffling symbols as simple as 0 and 1, could simulate any conceivable act of mathematical deduction.(This insight, that digital computers can simulate any process of formal reasoning, is known as the thesis.)( This, along with concurrent discoveries in neurology, theory and cybernetics, inspired a small group of researchers to begin to seriously consider the possibility of building an electronic brain.(The field of AI research was founded at a conference on the campus of College in the summer of 1956.( The attendees, including John McCarthy, Minsky, Newell and Simon, became the leaders of AI research for many decades.( They and their students wrote programs that were, to most people, simply astonishing:(Russell and Norvig write it was astonishing whenever a computer did anything kind of smartish. ) computers were solving word problems in algebra, proving logical theorems and speaking English.( By the middle of the 1960s, research in the U.S. was heavily funded by the Department of Defense( and laboratories had been established around the world.( AIs founders were profoundly optimistic about the future of the new field: Simon predicted that machines will be capable, within twenty years, of doing any work a man can do and Minsky agreed, writing that within a generation ... the problem of creating artificial intelligence will substantially be solved.(They had failed to recognize the difficulty of some of the problems they faced.(See ) In 1974, in response to the criticism of James Lighthill and ongoing pressure from the US Congress to fund more productive projects, both the U.S. and British governments cut off all undirected exploratory research in AI. The next few years, when funding for projects was hard to find, would later be called the winter.(In the early 1980s, AI research was revived by the commercial success of systems,( a form of AI program that simulated the knowledge and analytical skills of one or more human experts. By 1985 the market for AI had reached over a billion dollars. At the same time, Japans generation computer project inspired the U.S and British governments to restore funding for academic research in the field.( However, beginning with the collapse of the Machine market in 1987, AI once again fell into disrepute, and a second, longer lasting winter began.(In the 1990s and early 21st century, AI achieved its greatest successes, albeit somewhat behind the scenes. Artificial intelligence is used for logistics, mining, diagnosis and many other areas throughout the technology industry.(The success was due to several factors: the increasing computational power of computers (see law), a greater emphasis on solving specific subproblems, the creation of new ties between AI and other fields working on similar problems, and a new commitment by researchers to solid mathematical methods and rigorous scientific standards.(On 11 May 1997, Deep Blue became the first computer chess-playing system to beat a reigning world chess champion, Kasparov.() In 2005, a Stanford robot won the Grand Challenge by driving autonomously for 131 miles along an unrehearsed desert trail.(DARPA Grand Challenge  home page)In February 2011, in a Jeopardy! show exhibition match, IBMs answering system, Watson, defeated the two greatest Jeopardy! champions, Rutter and Jennings, by a significant margin.()The leading-edge definition of artificial intelligence research is changing over time. One pragmatic definition is: AI research is that which computing scientists do not know how to do cost-effectively today. For example, in 1956 character recognition (OCR) was considered AI, but today, sophisticated OCR software with a context-sensitive checker and checker software comes for free with most scanners. No one would any longer consider already-solved computing science problems like OCR artificial intelligence today.Low-cost entertaining chess-playing software is commonly available for tablet computers. DARPA no longer provides significant funding for chess-playing computing system development. The Kinect which provides a 3D bodymotion interface for the 360 uses algorithms that emerged from lengthy AI research,(Kinects AI breakthrough explained) but few consumers realize the technology source.AI applications are no longer the exclusive domain of of defense R&D, but are now common place consumer items and inexpensive intelligent toys.In common usage, the term AI no longer seems to apply to off-the-shelf solved computing-science problems, which may have originally emerged out of years of AI research. Problems Can a machine act intelligently? is still an problem. Taking A machine can act intelligently as a hypothesis, many researchers have attempted to build such a machine.The general problem of simulating (or creating) intelligence has been broken down into a number of specific sub-problems. These consist of particular traits or capabilities that researchers would like an intelligent system to display. The traits described below have received the most attention.(Deduction, reasoning, problem solving Early AI researchers developed algorithms that imitated the step-by-step reasoning that humans use when they solve puzzles or make logical deductions.( By the late 1980s and 90s, AI research had also developed highly successful methods for dealing with uncertain or incomplete information, employing concepts from probability and economics.(For difficult problems, most of these algorithms can require enormous computational resources  most experience a explosion: the amount of memory or computer time required becomes astronomical when the problem goes beyond a certain size. The search for more efficient problem solving algorithms is a high priority for AI research.(Human beings solve most of their problems using fast, intuitive judgments rather than the conscious, step-by-step deduction that early AI research was able to model.( AI has made some progress at imitating this kind of sub-symbolic problem solving: agent approaches emphasize the importance of sensorimotor skills to higher reasoning; net research attempts to simulate the structures inside human and animal brains that give rise to this skill.Knowledge representationright|thumb|An ontology represents knowledge as a set of concepts within a domain and the relationships between those concepts.representation( and engineering( are central to AI research. Many of the problems machines are expected to solve will require extensive knowledge about the world. Among the things that AI needs to represent are: objects, properties, categories and relations between objects;( situations, events, states and time;( causes and effects;( knowledge about knowledge (what we know about what other people know);( and many other, less well researched domains. A representation of what exists is an ontology (borrowing a word from traditional philosophy), of which the most general are called upper ontologies.(Among the most difficult problems in knowledge representation are:;reasoning and the problem: Many of the things people know take the form of working assumptions. For example, if a bird comes up in conversation, people typically picture an animal that is fist sized, sings, and flies. None of these things are true about all birds. John McCarthy identified this problem in 1969( as the qualification problem: for any commonsense rule that AI researchers care to represent, there tend to be a huge number of exceptions. Almost nothing is simply true or false in the way that abstract logic requires. AI research has explored a number of solutions to this problem.(;The breadth of knowledge: The number of atomic facts that the average person knows is astronomical. Research projects that attempt to build a complete knowledge base of knowledge (e.g., Cyc) require enormous amounts of laborious ontological engineering  they must be built, by hand, one complicated concept at a time.( A major goal is to have the computer understand enough concepts to be able to learn by reading from sources like the internet, and thus be able to add to its own ontology.;The subsymbolic form of some knowledge: Much of what people know is not represented as facts or statements that they could express verbally. For example, a chess master will avoid a particular chess position because it feels too exposed() or an art critic can take one look at a statue and instantly realize that it is a fake.() These are intuitions or tendencies that are represented in the brain non-consciously and sub-symbolically.( Knowledge like this informs, supports and provides a context for symbolic, conscious knowledge. As with the related problem of sub-symbolic reasoning, it is hoped that situated AI or intelligence will provide ways to represent this kind of knowledge.(PlanningImage:Hierarchical-control-system.svg|thumb| A control system is a form of system in which a set of devices and governing software is arranged in a hierarchy.Intelligent agents must be able to set goals and achieve them.( They need a way to visualize the future (they must have a representation of the state of the world and be able to make predictions about how their actions will change it) and be able to make choices that maximize the utility (or value) of the available choices.(In classical planning problems, the agent can assume that it is the only thing acting on the world and it can be certain what the consequences of its actions may be.( However, if this is not true, it must periodically check if the world matches its predictions and it must change its plan as this becomes necessary, requiring the agent to reason under uncertainty.(planning uses the cooperation and competition of many agents to achieve a given goal. behavior such as this is used by algorithms and intelligence.(Learninglearning( has been central to AI research from the beginning.(Turing discussed the centrality of learning as early as 1950, in his classic paper Machinery and Intelligence. ) In 1956, at the original Dartmouth AI summer conference, Solomonoff wrote a report on unsupervised probabilistic machine learning: An Inductive Inference Machine.((pdf scanned copy of the original) (version published in 1957, An Inductive Inference Machine, IRE Convention Record, Section on Information Theory, Part 2, pp. 56-62))learning is the ability to find patterns in a stream of input. learning includes both classification and numerical regression. Classification is used to determine what category something belongs in, after seeing a number of examples of things from several categories. Regression takes a set of numerical input/output examples and attempts to discover a continuous function that would generate the outputs from the inputs. In learning( the agent is rewarded for good responses and punished for bad ones. These can be analyzed in terms of theory, using concepts like utility. The mathematical analysis of machine learning algorithms and their performance is a branch of computer science known as learning theory.(Natural language processingFile:ParseTree.svg|thumb| A tree represents the syntactic structure of a sentence according to some grammar.language processing( gives machines the ability to read and understand the languages that humans speak. Many researchers hope that a sufficiently powerful natural language processing system would be able to acquire knowledge on its own, by reading the existing text available over the internet. Some straightforward applications of natural language processing include retrieval (or mining) and translation.(Motion and manipulationThe field of robotics( is closely related to AI. Intelligence is required for robots to be able to handle such tasks as object manipulation( and navigation, with sub-problems of localization (knowing where you are), mapping (learning what is around you) and planning (figuring out how to get there).(Perceptionperception( is the ability to use input from sensors (such as cameras, microphones, sonar and others more exotic) to deduce aspects of the world. vision( is the ability to analyze visual input. A few selected subproblems are recognition,( facial recognition and recognition.(Social intelligencerobot at MIT Museum.jpg|thumb|Kismet, a robot with rudimentary social skillsEmotion and social skills( play two roles for an intelligent agent. First, it must be able to predict the actions of others, by understanding their motives and emotional states. (This involves elements of theory, theory, as well as the ability to model human emotions and the perceptual skills to detect emotions.) Also, for good interaction, an intelligent machine also needs to display emotions. At the very least it must appear polite and sensitive to the humans it interacts with. At best, it should have normal emotions itself.CreativityA sub-field of AI addresses creativity both theoretically (from a philosophical and psychological perspective) and practically (via specific implementations of systems that generate outputs that can be considered creative, or systems that identify and assess creativity). A related area of computational research is Intuition and Imagination.General intelligenceMost researchers hope that their work will eventually be incorporated into a machine with general intelligence (known as AI), combining all the skills above and exceeding human abilities at most or all of them.( A few believe that anthropomorphic features like consciousness or an brain may be required for such a project.((Many of the problems above are considered AI-complete: to solve one problem, you must solve them all. For example, even a straightforward, specific task like translation requires that the machine follow the authors argument (reason), know what is being talked about (knowledge), and faithfully reproduce the authors intention (social intelligence). translation, therefore, is believed to be AI-complete: it may require AI to be done as well as humans can do it.( Approaches There is no established unifying theory or paradigm that guides AI research. Researchers disagree about many issues.(Nils Nilsson writes: Simply put, there is wide disagreement in the field about what AI is all about .) A few of the most long standing questions that have remained unanswered are these: should artificial intelligence simulate natural intelligence by studying psychology or neurology? Or is human biology as irrelevant to AI research as bird biology is to engineering?(Can intelligent behavior be described using simple, elegant principles (such as logic or optimization)? Or does it necessarily require solving a large number of completely unrelated problems?(Can intelligence be reproduced using high-level symbols, similar to words and ideas? Or does it require sub-symbolic processing?(John Haugeland, who coined the term GOFAI (Good Old-Fashioned Artificial Intelligence), also proposed that AI should more properly be referred to as intelligence, a term which has since been adopted by some non-GOFAI researchers.http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi10.1.1.38.8384&reprep1&typepdfhttp://books.google.com/books?hlen&lr&ida_ZR81Z25z0C&oifnd&pgPA63&dqrelated:iCpuTpmGk6gJ:scholar.google.com/&otsn1-TsvqXGJ&sig1xthOJ2WQmKtdSt7ISFH2yu2l3Q#vonepage&q&ffalsehttp://www.imagination-engines.com/ Cybernetics and brain simulation is currently no consensus on how closely the brain should be simulated.In the 1940s and 1950s, a number of researchers explored the connection between neurology, theory, and cybernetics. Some of them built machines that used electronic networks to exhibit rudimentary intelligence, such as Grey Walters turtles and the Hopkins Beast. Many of these researchers gathered for meetings of the Teleological Society at University and the Club in England.( By 1960, this approach was largely abandoned, although elements of it would be revived in the 1980s. Symbolic When access to digital computers became possible in the middle 1950s, AI research began to explore the possibility that human intelligence could be reduced to symbol manipulation. The research was centered in three institutions: CMU, Stanford and MIT, and each one developed its own style of research. Haugeland named these approaches to AI good old fashioned AI or GOFAI.(; Cognitive simulation: Economist Simon and Newell studied human problem solving skills and attempted to formalize them, and their work laid the foundations of the field of artificial intelligence, as well as science, research and science. Their research team used the results of  psychological experiments to develop programs that simulated the techniques that people used to solve problems. This tradition, centered at Mellon University would eventually culminate in the development of the Soar architecture in the middle 80s.((; Logic-based: Unlike Newell and Simon, John McCarthy felt that machines did not need to simulate human thought, but should instead try to find the essence of abstract reasoning and problem solving, regardless of whether people used the same algorithms.( His laboratory at Stanford (SAIL) focused on using formal logic to solve a wide variety of problems, including representation, planning and learning.( Logic was also focus of the work at the of Edinburgh and elsewhere in Europe which led to the development of the programming language Prolog and the science of programming.(; Anti-logic or scruffy: Researchers at MIT (such as Minsky and Papert)( found that solving difficult problems in vision and language processing required ad-hoc solutions  they argued that there was no simple and general principle (like logic) that would capture all the aspects of intelligent behavior. Schank described their anti-logic approaches as scruffy (as opposed to the neat paradigms at CMU and Stanford).( knowledge bases (such as Lenats Cyc) are an example of scruffy AI, since they must be built by hand, one complicated concept at a time.(; Knowledge-based: When computers with large memories became available around 1970, researchers from all three traditions began to build knowledge into AI applications.( This knowledge revolution led to the development and deployment of systems (introduced by Feigenbaum), the first truly successful form of AI software.( The knowledge revolution was also driven by the realization that enormous amounts of knowledge would be required by many simple AI applications. Sub-symbolic During the 1960s, symbolic approaches had achieved great success at simulating high-level thinking in small demonstration programs. Approaches based on cybernetics or networks were abandoned or pushed into the background.(The most dramatic case of sub-symbolic AI being pushed into the background was the devastating critique of perceptrons by Minsky and Papert in 1969. See of AI, winter, or Rosenblatt.) By the 1980s, however, progress in symbolic AI seemed to stall and many believed that symbolic systems would never be able to imitate all the processes of human cognition, especially perception, robotics, learning and recognition. A number of researchers began to look into sub-symbolic approaches to specific AI problems.(; Bottom-up, embodied, situated, behavior-based or AI: Researchers from the related field of robotics, such as Brooks, rejected symbolic AI and focused on the basic engineering problems that would allow robots to move and survive.( Their work revived the non-symbolic viewpoint of the early cybernetics researchers of the 50s and reintroduced the use of theory in AI. This coincided with the development of the mind thesis in the related field of science: the idea that aspects of the body (such as  movement, perception and visualization) are required for higher intelligence.; Computational Intelligence: Interest in networks and connectionism was revived by Rumelhart and others in the middle 1980s.( These and other sub-symbolic approaches, such as systems and computation, are now studied collectively by the emerging discipline of intelligence.(StatisticalIn the 1990s, AI researchers developed sophisticated mathematical tools to solve specific subproblems. These tools are truly scientific, in the sense that their results are both measurable and verifiable, and they have been responsible for many of AIs recent successes. The shared mathematical language has also permitted a high level of collaboration with more established fields (like mathematics, economics or research). Stuart Russell and Norvig describe this movement as nothing less than a revolution and the victory of the neats.( Critiques argue that these techniques are too focussed on particular problems and have failed to address the long term goal of general intelligence. Integrating the approaches ;Intelligent agent paradigm: An agent is a system that perceives its environment and takes actions which maximize its chances of success. The simplest intelligent agents are programs that solve specific problems. More complicated agents include human beings and organizations of human beings (such as firms). The paradigm gives researchers license to study isolated problems and find solutions that are both verifiable and useful, without agreeing on one single approach. An agent that solves a specific problem can use any approach that works  some agents are symbolic and logical, some are sub-symbolic networks and others may use new approaches. The paradigm also gives researchers a common language to communicate with other fieldssuch as theory and economicsthat also use concepts of abstract agents. The intelligent agent paradigm became widely accepted during the 1990s.(;architectures and architectures: Researchers have designed systems to build intelligent systems out of interacting agents in a system.( A system with both symbolic and sub-symbolic components is a intelligent system, and the study of such systems is intelligence systems integration. A control system provides a bridge between sub-symbolic AI at its lowest, reactive levels and traditional symbolic AI at its highest levels, where relaxed time constraints permit planning and world modelling.( Brooks architecture was an early proposal for such a hierarchical system.( Tools In the course of 50 years of research, AI has developed a large number of tools to solve the most difficult problems in science. A few of the most general of these methods are discussed below. Search and optimization Many problems in AI can be solved in theory by intelligently searching through many possible solutions:( Reasoning can be reduced to performing a search. For example, logical proof can be viewed as searching for a path that leads from premises to conclusions, where each step is the application of an rule.( Planning algorithms search through trees of goals and subgoals, attempting to find a path to a target goal, a process called analysis.( Robotics algorithms for moving limbs and grasping objects use local searches in space.( Many learning algorithms use search algorithms based on optimization.Simple exhaustive searches( are rarely sufficient for most real world problems: the search space (the number of places to search) quickly grows to astronomical numbers. The result is a search that is too slow or never completes. The solution, for many problems, is to use heuristics or rules of thumb that eliminate choices that are unlikely to lead to the goal (called pruning the tree). Heuristics supply the program with a best guess for the path on which the solution lies.(A very different kind of search came to prominence in the 1990s, based on the mathematical theory of optimization. For many problems, it is possible to begin the search with some form of a guess and then refine the guess incrementally until no more refinements can be made. These algorithms can be visualized as blind climbing: we begin the search at a random point on the landscape, and then, by jumps or steps, we keep moving our guess uphill, until we reach the top. Other optimization algorithms are annealing, search and optimization.(computation uses a form of optimization search. For example, they may begin with a population of organisms (the guesses) and then allow them to mutate and recombine, selecting only the fittest to survive each generation (refining the guesses). Forms of computation include intelligence algorithms (such as ant colony or swarm optimization)( and algorithms (such as algorithms and programming).( Logic Logic( is used for knowledge representation and problem solving, but it can be applied to other problems as well. For example, the satplan algorithm uses logic for planning( and logic programming is a method for learning.(Several different forms of logic are used in AI research. Propositional or logic( is the logic of statements which can be true or false. logic( also allows the use of quantifiers and predicates, and can express facts about objects, their properties, and their relations with each other. logic,( is a version of first-order logic which allows the truth of a statement to be represented as a value between 0 and 1, rather than simply True (1) or False (0). systems can be used for uncertain reasoning and have been widely used in modern industrial and consumer product control systems. logic( models uncertainty in a different and more explicit manner than fuzzy-logic: a given binomial opinion satisfies belief + disbelief + uncertainty  1 within a distribution. By this method, ignorance can be distinguished from probabilistic statements that an agent makes with high confidence.logics, logics and circumscription( are forms of logic designed to help with default reasoning and the problem. Several extensions of logic have been designed to handle specific domains of knowledge, such as: logics;( calculus, calculus and calculus (for representing events and time);( causal calculus;( belief calculus; and logics.(Probabilistic methods for uncertain reasoningMany problems in AI (in reasoning, planning, learning, perception and robotics) require the agent to operate with incomplete or uncertain information. AI researchers have devised a number of powerful tools to solve these problems using methods from probability theory and economics.(networks( are a very general tool that can be used for a large number of problems: reasoning (using the inference algorithm),( learning (using the algorithm),( planning (using networks)( and perception (using Bayesian networks).( Probabilistic algorithms can also be used for filtering, prediction, smoothing and finding explanations for streams of data, helping perception systems to analyze processes that occur over time (e.g., Markov models or filters).(A key concept from the science of economics is utility: a measure of how valuable something is to an intelligent agent. Precise mathematical tools have been developed that analyze how an agent can make choices and plan, using theory, analysis,( information value theory.( These tools include models such as decision processes,( dynamic networks,( theory and design.( Classifiers and statistical learning methods The simplest AI applications can be divided into two types: classifiers (if shiny then diamond) and controllers (if shiny then pick up). Controllers do however also classify conditions before inferring actions, and therefore classification forms a central part of many AI systems. Classifiers are functions that use matching to determine a closest match. They can be tuned according to examples, making them very attractive for use in AI. These examples are known as observations or patterns. In supervised learning, each pattern belongs to a certain predefined class. A class can be seen as a decision that has to be made. All the observations combined with their class labels are known as a data set. When a new observation is received, that observation is classified based on previous experience.(A classifier can be trained in various ways; there are many statistical and learning approaches. The most widely used classifiers are the neural network,(methods such as the vector machine,(neighbor algorithm,(mixture model,(Bayes classifier,(and decision tree.(The performance of these classifiers have been compared over a wide range of tasks. Classifier performance depends greatly on the characteristics of the data to be classified. There is no single classifier that works best on all given problems; this is also referred to as the no free lunch theorem. Determining a suitable classifier for a given problem is still more an art than science.( Neural networks File:Artificial neural network.svg|thumb|A neural network is an interconnected group of nodes, akin to the vast network of neurons in the brain.The study of neural networks( began in the decade before the field AI research was founded, in the work of Pitts and McCullough. Other important early researchers were Rosenblatt, who invented the perceptron and Werbos who developed the backpropagation algorithm.(The main categories of networks are acyclic or neural networks (where the signal passes in only one direction) and neural networks (which allow feedback). Among the most popular feedforward networks are perceptrons, perceptrons and basis networks.( Among recurrent networks, the most famous is the net, a form of attractor network, which was first described by Hopfield in 1982.( Neural networks can be applied to the problem of control (for robotics) or learning, using such techniques as learning and learning.(temporal memory is an approach that models some of the structural and algorithmic properties of the neocortex.( Control theory theory, the grandchild of cybernetics, has many important applications, especially in robotics.( Languages AI researchers have developed several specialized languages for AI research, including Lisp( and Prolog.(Evaluating progress In 1950, Alan Turing proposed a general procedure to test the intelligence of an agent now known as the test. This procedure allows almost all the major problems of artificial intelligence to be tested. However, it is a very difficult challenge and at present all agents fail.(Artificial intelligence can also be evaluated on specific problems such as small problems in chemistry, hand-writing recognition and game-playing. Such tests have been termed matter expert Turing tests. Smaller problems provide more achievable goals and there are an ever-increasing number of positive results.(The broad classes of outcome for an AI test are: (1) Optimal: it is not possible to perform better. (2) Strong super-human: performs better than all humans. (3) Super-human: performs better than most humans. (4) Sub-human: performs worse than most humans. For example, performance at draughts is optimal,( performance at chess is super-human and nearing strong super-human (see chess#Computers versus humans) and performance at many everyday tasks (such as recognizing a face or crossing a room without bumping into something) is sub-human.A quite different approach measures machine intelligence through tests which are developed from mathematical definitions of intelligence. Examples of these kinds of tests start in the late nineties devising intelligence tests using notions from complexity and compression.( Two major advantages of mathematical definitions are their applicability to nonhuman intelligences and their absence of a requirement for human testers. Applications File:Automated online assistant.png|thumb|An online assistant providing customer service on a web page - one of many applications of artificial intelligence.Artificial intelligence techniques are pervasive and are too numerous to list.  Frequently, when a technique reaches mainstream use, it is no longer considered artificial intelligence; this phenomenon is described as the effect.() Competitions and prizes There are a number of competitions and prizes to promote research in artificial intelligence. The main areas promoted are: general machine intelligence, conversational behavior, data-mining, driverless cars, robot soccer and games. Platforms A platform (or platform) is defined as some sort of hardware architecture or software framework (including application frameworks), that allows software to run. As Rodney Brooks(Brooks, R.A., How to build complete creatures rather than isolated cognitive simulators, in K. VanLehn (ed.), Architectures for Intelligence, pp. 225239, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 1991.) pointed out many years ago, it is not just the artificial intelligence software that defines the AI features of the platform, but rather the actual platform itself that affects the AI that results, i.e., we need to be working out AI problems on real-world platforms rather than in isolation.A wide variety of platforms has allowed different aspects of AI to develop, ranging from systems, albeit PC-based but still an entire real-world system, to various robot platforms such as the widely available Roomba with open interface.(Hacking Roomba  Search Results  atmel) Philosophy Artificial intelligence, by claiming to be able to recreate the capabilities of the human mind, is both a challenge and an inspiration for philosophy. Are there limits to how intelligent machines can be? Is there an essential difference between human intelligence and artificial intelligence? Can a machine have a mind and consciousness? A few of the most influential answers to these questions are given below.(;Turings polite convention: If a machine acts as intelligently as a human being, then it is as intelligent as a human being. Turing theorized that, ultimately, we can only judge the intelligence of a machine based on its behavior. This theory forms the basis of the test.(;The Dartmouth proposal: Every aspect of learning or any other feature of intelligence can be so precisely described that a machine can be made to simulate it. This conjecture was printed in the proposal for the Dartmouth Conference of 1956, and represents the position of most working AI researchers.(; Newell and Simons physical symbol system hypothesis: A physical symbol system has the necessary and sufficient means of general intelligent action. Newell and Simon argue that intelligences consists of formal operations on symbols.( Dreyfus argued that, on the contrary, human expertise depends on unconscious instinct rather than conscious symbol manipulation and on having a feel for the situation rather than explicit symbolic knowledge. (See critique of AI.)(Dreyfus criticized the necessary condition of the symbol system hypothesis, which he called the psychological assumption: The mind can be viewed as a device operating on bits of information according to formal rules. )(; incompleteness theorem: A system (such as a computer program) can not prove all true statements.(This is a paraphrase of the relevant implication of Gdels theorems.) Penrose is among those who claim that Gdels theorem limits what machines can do. (See Emperors New Mind.)(; Searles strong AI hypothesis: The appropriately programmed computer with the right inputs and outputs would thereby have a mind in exactly the same sense human beings have minds.( John Searle counters this assertion with his room argument, which asks us to look inside the computer and try to find where the mind might be.(; The brain argument: The brain can be simulated. Moravec, Kurzweil and others have argued that it is technologically feasible to copy the brain directly into hardware and software, and that such a simulation will be essentially identical to the original.( Predictions Artificial Intelligence is a common topic in both fiction and projections about the future of technology and society. The existence of an artificial intelligence that rivals human intelligence raises difficult ethical issues, and the potential power of the technology inspires both hopes and fears.In fiction, Artificial Intelligence has appeared fulfilling many roles, includinga servant (R2D2 in Wars),a law enforcer (K.I.T.T. Knight Rider),a comrade (Lt. Commander Data in Trek: The Next Generation),a conqueror/overlord (Matrix),a dictator (Folded Hands),a benevolent provider/de facto ruler (Culture),an assassin (Terminator),a sentient race (Battlestar Galactica/Transformers),an extension to human abilities (in the Shell)and the savior of the human race (Daneel Olivaw in the Robot Series).Shelleys Frankenstein considers a key issue in the of artificial intelligence: if a machine can be created that has intelligence, could it also feel? If it can feel, does it have the same rights as a human? The idea also appears in modern fiction, including the films I Robot, Runner and Artificial Intelligence, in which humanoid machines have the ability to feel human emotions. This issue, now known as rights, is currently being considered by, for example, Californias for the Future, although many critics believe that the discussion is premature.( The subject is profoundly discussed in the 2010 documentary film & Pray.(http://www.plugandpray-film.de/en/content.html Independent documentary Plug & Pray, featuring Joseph Weizenbaum and Raymond Kurzweil)Martin Ford, author of The Lights in the Tunnel: Automation, Accelerating Technology and the Economy of the Future,() and others argue that specialized artificial intelligence applications, robotics and other forms of automation will ultimately result in significant unemployment as machines begin to match and exceed the capability of workers to perform most routine and repetitive jobs. Ford predicts that many knowledge-based occupationsand in particular entry level jobswill be increasingly susceptible to automation via expert systems, machine learning(Machine Learning: A Job Killer?) and other AI-enhanced applications. AI-based applications may also be used to amplify the capabilities of low-wage offshore workers, making it more feasible to outsource knowledge work.(Weizenbaum wrote that AI applications can not, by definition, successfully simulate genuine human empathy and that the use of AI technology in fields such as service or psychotherapy(In the early 70s, Colby presented a version of Weizenbaums ELIZA known as DOCTOR which he promoted as a serious therapeutic tool. ) was deeply misguided. Weizenbaum was also bothered that AI researchers (and some philosophers) were willing to view the human mind as nothing more than a computer program (a position now known as computationalism). To Weizenbaum these points suggest that AI research devalues human life.(Many futurists believe that artificial intelligence will ultimately transcend the limits of progress. Kurzweil has used law (which describes the relentless exponential improvement in digital technology) to calculate that computers will have the same processing power as human brains by the year 2029. He also predicts that by 2045 artificial intelligence will reach a point where it is able to improve itself at a rate that far exceeds anything conceivable in the past, a scenario that fiction writer Vinge named the singularity.(Robot designer Moravec, cyberneticist Warwick and inventor Kurzweil have predicted that humans and machines will merge in the future into cyborgs that are more capable and powerful than either.( This idea, called transhumanism, which has roots in Huxley and Ettinger, has been illustrated in fiction as well, for example in the manga in the Shell and the science-fiction series Dune.Fredkin argues that artificial intelligence is the next stage in evolution, an idea first proposed by Samuel Butlers among the Machines (1863), and expanded upon by George Dyson in his book of the same name in 1998.(McCorduck writes that all these scenarios are expressions of the ancient human desire to, as she calls it, forge the gods.(See also* intelligence in fiction* Intelligence (journal)* intelligence (video games)* intelligence* sciences* artificial intelligence* of basic artificial intelligence topics* Artificial intelligence researchers* List of important AI publications* List of AI projects* of emerging technologies* of scientific journals* of mind* singularity* Language Learning* Description of Machine Learning field References  Notes ((TOPIO:* * ))(Definition of AI as the study of agents:* , which provides the version that is used in this article. Note that they use the term computational intelligence as a synonym for artificial intelligence.*  (who prefer the term rational agent) and write The whole-agent view is now widely accepted in the field .* )(Although there is some controversy on this point (see ), McCarthy states unequivocally I came up with the term in a c|net interview. )(McCarthys definition of AI:* )(This is a central idea of McCorducks Machines That Think. She writes: I like to think of artificial intelligence as the scientific apotheosis of a venerable cultural tradition.  Artificial intelligence in one form or another is an idea that has pervaded Western intellectual history, a dream in urgent need of being realized.  Our history is full of attemptsnutty, eerie, comical, earnest, legendary and realto make artificial intelligences, to reproduce what is the essential usbypassing the ordinary means. Back and forth between myth and reality, our imaginations supplying what our workshops couldnt, we have engaged for a long time in this odd form of self-reproduction.  She traces the desire back to its Hellenistic roots and calls it the urge to forge the Gods. )(AI applications widely used behind the scenes:* * * )(Pamela  writes of the rough shattering of AI in subfieldsvision, natural language, decision theory, genetic algorithms, robotics ... and these with own sub-subfieldthat would hardly have anything to say to each other.)(This list of intelligent traits is based on the topics covered by the major AI textbooks, including:* * * * )(General intelligence (AI) is discussed in popular introductions to AI:*  and )(AI in myth:* * )(images as artificial intelligence:*  (statue of Amun)* These were the first machines to be believed to have true intelligence and consciousness. Trismegistus expressed the common belief that with these statues, craftsman had reproduced the true nature of the gods, their sensus and spiritus. McCorduck makes the connection between sacred automatons and Mosaic law (developed around the same time), which expressly forbids the worship of robots )(Humanoid automata:Yan Shi:* of Alexandria:* Al-Jazari:* von Kempelen:* )(Artificial beings:ibn Hayyns Takwin:* Loews Golem:* * Paracelsus Homunculus:* )(AI in early science fiction.* )(Formal reasoning:* )(AIs immediate precursors:* * * * See also . Among the researchers who laid the foundations of AI were Turing, Von Neumann, Wiener, Shannon, McCullough, Pitts and Hebb.)(conference:* * , who writes the conference is generally recognized as the official birthdate of the new science.* , who call the conference the birth of artificial intelligence.* )(Hegemony of the Dartmouth conference attendees:* , who write for the next 20 years the field would be dominated by these people and their students.* )(Golden years of AI (successful symbolic reasoning programs 1956-1973):* * * * The programs described are Bobrows STUDENT, Newell and Simons Theorist and Winograds SHRDLU.)(DARPA pours money into undirected pure research into AI during the 1960s:* * * )(AI in England:* )(Optimism of early AI:* Simon quote:  quoted in .* Minsky quote:  quoted in .)(First Winter, Amendment, report* * * * )(Expert systems:* ,* * ,* * * )(Boom of the 1980s: rise of systems, Fifth Generation Project, Alvey, MCC, SCI:* * * * )(Second winter:* * * )(Formal methods are now preferred (Victory of the neats):* * )(Problem solving, puzzle solving, game playing and deduction:* ,* ,* ,* )(Uncertain reasoning:* ,* ,* ,* )(Intractability and efficiency and the explosion:* )(Psychological evidence of sub-symbolic reasoning:*  showed that people do poorly on completely abstract problems, but if the problem is restated to allow the use of intuitive intelligence, performance dramatically improves. (See selection task)*  have shown that people are terrible at elementary problems that involve uncertain reasoning. (See of cognitive biases for several examples).*  have controversially argued that even our skills at mathematics depend on knowledge and skills that come from the body, i.e. sensorimotor and perceptual skills. (See Mathematics Comes From))(representation:* ,* ,* ,* ,* )(engineering:* ,* ,* )(Representing categories and relations: networks, logics, inheritance (including frames and scripts):* ,* ,* ,* )(Representing events and time:calculus, calculus, calculus (including solving the problem):* ,* ,* )(Causal calculus:* )(Representing knowledge about knowledge: calculus, logics:* ,* )(Ontology:* )(problem:* * While McCarthy was primarily concerned with issues in the logical representation of actions,  apply the term to the more general issue of default reasoning in the vast network of assumptions underlying all our commonsense knowledge.)(Default reasoning and logic, logics, circumscription, world assumption, abduction (Poole et al. places abduction under default reasoning. Luger et al. places this under uncertain reasoning):* ,* ,* ,* )(Breadth of commonsense knowledge:* ,* ,* ,*  (Introduction))(Expert knowledge as embodied intuition:*  (Dreyfus is a philosopher and critic of AI who was among the first to argue that most useful human knowledge was encoded sub-symbolically. See critique of AI)*  (Gladwells Blink is a popular introduction to sub-symbolic reasoning and knowledge.)*  (Hawkins argues that sub-symbolic knowledge should be the primary focus of AI research.))(Planning:* ,* ,* ,* ,* )(Information value theory:* )(Classical planning:* ,* ,* ,* )(Planning and acting in non-deterministic domains: conditional planning, execution monitoring, replanning and continuous planning:* )(Multi-agent planning and emergent behavior:* )(Learning:* ,* ,* ,* ,* )(learning:** )(learning theory:* CITATION IN PROGRESS.)(language processing:* * * * )(Applications of natural language processing, including retrieval (i.e. mining) and translation:* ,* )(Robotics:* ,* ,* )(Moving and space:* )(mapping (localization, etc):*)(perception:* * )(vision:* * * )(recognition:* *)facial recognition and recognition.(recognition:*)(Emotion and computing:* * )(Edelman, Aleksander and others have both argued that consciousness is required for strong AI. (; ))(brain arguments: AI requires a simulation of the operation of the human brain* * A few of the people who make some form of the argument:* * * The most extreme form of this argument (the brain replacement scenario) was put forward by Glymour in the mid-70s and was touched on by Pylyshyn and Searle in 1980.)(complete: )(Biological intelligence vs. intelligence in general:* , who make the analogy with engineering.* , who writes that there are two major branches of artificial intelligence: one aimed at producing intelligent behavior regardless of how it was accomplioshed, and the other aimed at modeling intelligent processes found in nature, particularly human ones.* , a paper in Science, which describes McCathys indifference to biological models. Kolata quotes McCarthy as writing: This is AI, so we dont care if its psychologically real. McCarthy recently reiterated his position at the AI@50 conference where he said Artificial intelligence is not, by definition, simulation of human intelligence .)(vs. scruffies:* * * )(Symbolic vs. sub-symbolic AI:* , who uses the term sub-symbolic.)()(Cognitive simulation, Newell and Simon, AI at CMU (then called Tech):* * )(Soar (history):* * )(McCarthy and AI research at SAIL and SRI:* * )(AI research at Edinburgh and in France, birth of Prolog:* * )(AI at MIT under Minsky in the 1960s :* * * )(Cyc:* , who calls it a determinedly scruffy enterprise* * * )(Knowledge revolution:* * )(Embodied approaches to AI:* * * )(Revival of connectionism:* * )(intelligence* IEEE Computational Intelligence Society)(The agent paradigm:* * * The definition used in this article, in terms of goals, actions, perception and environment, is due to . Other definitions also include knowledge and learning as additional criteria.)(architectures, intelligent systems:* * )(control system:* Albus, J. S. 4-D/RCS reference model architecture for unmanned ground vehicles. In G Gerhart, R Gunderson, and C Shoemaker, editors, Proceedings of the SPIE AeroSense Session on Unmanned Ground Vehicle Technology, volume 3693, pages 1120)(architecture:* CITATION IN PROGRESS.)(algorithms:* * * * )(chaining, chaining, clauses, and logical deduction as search:* * * * )(space search and planning:* * * )(Uninformed searches (first search, first search and general space search):* * * * )(Heuristic or informed searches (e.g., greedy best first and A*):* ,* ,* ,* )(Optimization searches:* * * )(life and society based learning:* )).(programming and algorithms:* ,* .* * * )(Logic:* ,* ,* ,* )(Satplan:* ,* ,* )(based learning, based learning, logic programming, based reasoning:* ,* ,* ,* )(logic:* ,* * )(logic and features such as equality:* ,* ,* ,* ,* )(logic:* )(logic:* CITATION IN PROGRESS.)(Stochastic methods for uncertain reasoning:* ,* ,* ,* ,* )(networks:* ,* ,* ,* )(inference algorithm:* ,* ,* ,* )(learning and the algorithm:* ,* ,* )(decision theory snd Bayesian networks:* )(Stochastic temporal models:* Bayesian networks:* Markov model:* filters:* )(theory and analysis:* ,* )(decision processes and dynamic networks:* )(theory and design:* )(Statistical learning methods and classifiers:* ,* )(methods such as the vector machine,(methods:* )(neighbor algorithm:* )(mixture model:* )(Bayes classifier:* )(Decision tree:* ,* ,* )(Classifier performance:* )(Neural networks and connectionism:* ,* ,* ,* )(Backpropagation:* ,* ,* )(neural networks, perceptrons and basis networks:* * )(neural networks, nets:* * )(learning, Hebbian coincidence learning, networks and attractor networks:* )(temporal memory:* )(theory:* ,* )(Lisp:* * ,* )(Prolog:* ,* )(The test:Turings original publication:* Historical influence and philosophical implications:* * * * )(matter expert Turing test:* CITATION IN PROGRESS.)(Mathematical definitions of intelligence:* * * )(AI:* CITATION IN PROGRESS.)(of AI. All of these positions in this section are mentioned in standard discussions of the subject, such as:* * )(Dartmouth proposal:*  (the original proposal)*  (historical significance))(The symbol systems hypothesis:* * * )(critique of artificial intelligence:* , * * * ,)(The Mathematical Objection:* * Making the Mathematical Objection:* * Refuting Mathematical Objection:*  under (2) The Mathematical Objection* Background:* , , , )(This version is from , and is also quoted in . Searles original formulation was The appropriately programmed computer really is a mind, in the sense that computers given the right programs can be literally said to understand and have other cognitive states.  . Strong AI is defined similarly by : The assertion that machines could possibly act intelligently (or, perhaps better, act as if they were intelligent) is called the weak AI hypothesis by philosophers, and the assertion that machines that do so are actually thinking (as opposed to simulating thinking) is called the strong AI hypothesis.)(Searles Room argument:* . Searles original presentation of the thought experiment.* .Discussion:* * * )(rights:* * Prematurity of:* In fiction:*  discusses Frankenstein and identifies the key ethical issues as scientific hubris and the suffering of the monster, i.e. rights.)(AI could decrease the demand for human labor:* * )(Weizenbaums critique of AI:* * * * Weizenbaum (the AI researcher who developed the first chatterbot program, ELIZA) argued in 1976 that the misuse of artificial intelligence has the potential to devalue human life.)(singularity:* * * )(Transhumanism:* * * )(AI as evolution:* Fredkin is quoted in .* postscript, Letter to the Editor.* )AI textbooks * * * * *  History of AI * *  Other sources *  accessdate2007-08-30*  BibTex Internet Archive* .* * * * * * * * * * * * * * .* * * * * * .* * * * * .* * * * * * * * * * .* , Presidential Address to the for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.* * * * * * * * .* * *  Further reading *TechCast Article Series, John Sagi, Framing Consciousness* Margaret, Mind As Machine, University Press, 2006* Johnston, John (2008) The Allure of Machinic Life: Cybernetics, Artificial Life, and the New AI, MIT Press* Myers, Courtney Boyd ed. (2009). The AI Report. Forbes June 2009* * Sun, R. & Bookman, L. (eds.), Computational Architectures: Integrating Neural and Symbolic Processes. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Needham, MA. 1994. External links * What Is AI?  An introduction to artificial intelligence by AI founder John McCarthy.* * * AITopics  A large directory of links and other resources maintained by the for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, the leading organization of academic AI researchers.* Artificial Intelligence Discussion groupartificialintellektt-lnginteligencijaartificialinteligenceintelligensIntelligenzet:Tehisintellektartificialinteligentecoartifizialartificielleartificilartificialgan:ko:inteligencijainteligentesobuatanartificialis:Gervigreindartificialeartificialisintelektsintelektasmenliintelligenciaml:buatan my:intelligentieja:intelligensintelligensartificiala inteligencjaartificialIntelligenceartificialartificialeintelligenceinteligenciainteligencainteligencijafi:TekolyintelligensArtipisyalth:zekakylartificialtu nhn tofiu-vro:Kunstmistusnga intelihensyazh-yue:intelektszh:
1548
Alexander_Emanuel_Agassiz
 children  L. AgassizAlexander Emmanuel Rodolphe Agassiz (December 17, 1835  March 27, 1910), son of Agassiz and stepson of Cabot Agassiz, was an American scientist and engineer.()BiographyAgassiz was born in Neuchtel, Switzerland and emigrated to the States with his father in 1849. He graduated from University in 1855, subsequently studying engineering and chemistry, and taking the degree of of science at the scientific school of the same institution in 1857; and in 1859 became an assistant in the States Coast Survey.Thenceforward he became a specialist in marine ichthyology, but devoted much time to the investigation, superintendence and exploitation of mines. J. Hulbert, a friend of Agassizs brother-in-law, Adams Shaw, had discovered a rich copper lode known as the conglomerate on the Peninsula Superior in Michigan. He persuaded them, along with a group of friends, to purchase a controlling interest in the mines, which later became known as the and Hecla Mining Company based in Michigan. He was elected a Fellow of the Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1862.() Up until the summer of 1866, Agassiz worked as an assistant in the museum of natural history that his father founded at Harvard. That summer, he took a trip to see the mines for himself and he afterwards became treasurer of the enterprise. Over the winter of 1866 and early 1867, mining operations began to falter due to the difficulty of extracting copper from the conglomerate. Hulbert had sold his interests in the mines and had moved on to other ventures. But Agassiz refused to give up hope for the mines, and he returned to the mines in March 1867 with his wife and young son. At that time, Calumet was a remote settlement, virtually inaccessible during the winter and very far removed from civilization even during the summer. With insufficient supplies at the mines, Agassiz struggled to maintain order, while back in Boston, Shaw was saddled with debt and the collapse of their interests. Shaw obtained financial assistance from John Simpkins, the selling agent for the enterprise to continue operations. Agassiz continued to live at Calumet, making gradual progress in stabilising the mining operations, such that he was able to leave the mines under the control of a general manager and return to Boston in 1868 before winter closed navigation.The mines continued to prosper and in May 1871, several mines were consolidated to form the and Hecla Mining Company with Shaw as its first president. In August, 1871, Shaw retired to the board of directors and Agassiz became president, a position he held until his death.Agassiz was a major factor in the mines continued success and visited the mines twice a year. He innovated by installing a giant engine, known as the Superior, which was able to lift 24 tons of rock from a depth of 1,200 metres (4,000 ft). He also built a railroad and dredged a channel to navigable waters. However, after a time the mines did not require his full-time year-round attention and he returned to his interests in natural history at Harvard.Out of his copper fortune, he gave some US$500,000 to Harvard for the museum of comparative zoology and other purposes.In 1875 he surveyed Titicaca, Peru, examined the copper mines of Peru and Chile, and made a collection of Peruvian antiquities for the of Comparative Zoology, of which he was curator from 1874 to 1885.  He assisted Wyville Thomson in the examination and classification of the collections of the 1872 Challenger Expedition, and wrote the Review of the Echini (2 vols., 18721874) in the reports.Between 1877 and 1880 he took part in the three dredging expeditions of the steamer Blake of the Coast Survey, and presented a full account of them in two volumes (1888). In 1896 Agassiz visited Fiji and Queensland and inspected the Barrier Reef, publishing a paper on the subject in 1898.Of Agassizs other writings on marine zoology, most are contained in the bulletins and memoirs of the museum of comparative zoology; but he published in 1865, with Cary Agassiz, his stepmother, Seaside Studies in Natural History, a work at once exact and stimulating, and in 1871 Marine Animals of Massachusetts Bay.Agassiz served as a president of the National Academy of Sciences, which since 1913 has awarded the Agassiz Medal in his memory. He died in 1910 on board the RMS Adriatic en route to New York from Southampton. Publications * * * * * * * * * * * See also*familyReferences* *External links* National Mining Hall of Fame:  Alexander Agassiz* AgassizAgassizAgassizEmanuel AgassizEmanuel AgassizEmanuel Agassizja:AgassizEmanuel AgassizAgassiz
